As regards decisions in previous courts, these
fall under three heads. First, we have matters
on which judgment has been given at some time or
other in cases of a similar nature these are, however, more correctly termed precedents, as for
instance where a father's will has been annulled or
confirmed in opposition to his sons. Secondly,
there are judgments concerned with the case itself;
it is from these that the name praeiudicium is
derived as examples I may cite those passed
against Oppianicus or by the senate against Milo.
Thirdly, there are judgments passed on the actual
case, as for example in cases where the accused has
been deported, or where renewed application is
made for the recognition of an individual as a free
man, or in portions of cases tried in the centumviral
court which come before two different panels of
judges. Such previous decisions are as a rule
confirmed in two ways by the authority of those
who gave the decision and by the likeness between the
two cases. As for their reversal, this can rarely be obtained by denouncing the judges, unless they have
been guilty of obvious error. For each of those who
are trying the case wishes the decision given by
another to stand, since he too has to give judgment
and is reluctant to create a precedent that may
recoil upon himself. Consequently, as regards the
first two classes, we must, if possible, take refuge in
some dissimilarity between the two cases, and two
cases are scarcely ever alike in all their details.
If, however, such a course is impossible and the
case is the same as that on which the previous
decision was given, we must complain of the negligence shown in the conduct of the previous case
or of the weakness of the parties condemned,
or of undue influence employed to corrupt the
witnesses, or again of popular prejudice or ignorance
which reacted unfavourably against our client; or
else we must consider what has occurred since to
alter the aspect of the case. If none of these courses
can be adopted, it will still be possible to point out
that the peculiar circumstances of many trials have
led to unjust decisions; hence condemnations such
as that of Rutilius and acquittals such as those of
Clodius and Catiline. We must also ask the judges
to consider the facts of the case on their merits
rather than make their verdict the inevitable consequence of a verdict given by others. When, however, we are confronted by decrees of the senate, or
ordinances of emperors or magistrates, there is no
remedy, unless we can make out that there is some
difference, however small, between the cases, or
that the same persons or persons holding the same
powers have made some subsequent enactment reversing the former decision. Failing this, there will
be no case for judgment. 