I turn to tile discussion of ambiguity, which will
be found to have countless species indeed, in the
opinion of certain philosophers, there is not a single
word which has not a diversity of meanings. There
are, however, very few genera, since ambiguity must
occur either in a single word or in a group of words. Single words give rise to error, when the same
noun applies to a number of things or persons the
Greeks call this homonymy for example, it is uncertain with regard to the word gallus whether it
means a cock or a Gaul or a proper name or an
emasculated priest of tybele; while Ajax may refer
either to the son of Telamon or the son of Oileus.
Again, verbs likewise may have different meanings,
as, for example, cerno. This ambiguity crops up in
many ways, and gives rise to disputes, mole especially
in connexion with wills, when two men of the same
name claim their freedom or, it may be, an inheritance, or again, when the enquiry turns on the precise
nature of the bequest. There is another form of
ambiguity where a word has one meaning when
entire and another when divided, as, for example,
ingenua, armameniam or Corvinum. The disputes
arising from such ambiguities are no more than
childish quibbles, but nevertheless the Greeks are
in the habit of making them the subject for controversial themes, as, for example, in the notorious
case of the when the question is whether
it is a hall which has fallen down three times  or a flute-player who fell down that is to be sold.
A third form of ambiguity is caused by the use of
compound words; for example, if a man orders his
body to be buried in a cultivated spot, and should
direct, as is often done, a considerable space of land
surrounding his tomb to be taken from the land left
to his heirs with a view to preserving his ashes from
outrage, an occasion for dispute may be afforded by
the question whether the words mean in culto loco or inculto loco. Thus arises the Greek theme about Leon and Pantaleon, who go to law because
the handwriting of a will makes it uncertain whether
the testator has left all his property to Leon or his
property to Pantaleon. Groups of words give rise to more serious ambiguity. Such ambiguity may arise from doubt as
to a case, as in the following passage Or it may arise from the arrangement of the words,
which makes it doubtful what the exact reference of
some word or words may be, more especially when
there is a word in the middle of the sentence which
may be referred either to what precedes or what
follows, as in the line of Virgil which describes
Troilus as where it may be disputed whether the poet means
that he is still holding the reins, or that, although
he holds the reins, he is still dragged along. The
controversial theme, turns on a similar ambiguity; for it raises
the question whether it is the statue holding the
spear which is to be of gold, or whether the spear
should be of gold and the statue of some other
material. The same result is even more frequently
produced by a mistaken inflexion of the voice, as in
the line It is also often doubtful to which of two antecedents
a phrase is to be referred. Hence we get such controversial themes as, where it is left uncertain which of the
two is to make the choice. But in these examples of ambiguity, the first may
be remedied by a change of case, the second by
separating 1 the words or altering their position, the
third by some addition. Ambiguity resulting from
the use of two accusatives may be removed by the
substitution of the ablative for example, Lachetem
audivi percussisse Demeam I heard that Demea struck
Laches, or that L. struck D. may be rendered clear
by writing a Lachete percussum Demeam that D. was
struck by L.. There is, however, a natural ambiguity in the ablative case itself, as I pointed out
in the first book. For example, caelo decurrit aperto
leaves it doubtful whether the poet means he
hastened down or Words may
be separated by a breathing space or pause. We
may, for instance, say statuam, and then, after a
slight pause, add auream hastam, or the pause may
come between statuam auream and haslam. The
addition referred to above would take the form quod
elegerit ipse, where ipse will show that the reference
to the heir, or quod elegerit ipsa, making the reference
to the wife. In cases where ambiguity is caused
by the addition of a word, the difficulty may be
eliminated by the removal of a word, as in the
sentence nos flentes illos deprehendimus. Where it
is doubtful to what a word or phrase refers, and the
word or phrase itself is ambiguous, we shall have to
alter several words, as, for example, in the sentence, where is ambiguous. Cicero
commits the same fault when he says of Gaius
Fannius, For over himself may refer either to his
father-in-law or to Fannius. Again, another source
of ambiguity arises from leaving it doubtful in a
written document whether a syllable is long or short.
Cato, for example, means one thing in the nominative when its second syllable is short, and another in
the dative or ablative when the same syllable is long.
There are also a number of other forms of ambiguity
which it is unnecessary for me to describe at length. Further, it is quite unimportant how ambiguity
arises or how it is remedied. For it is clear in all
cases that two interpretations are possible, and as
far as the written or spoken word is concerned,
it is equally important for both parties. It is
therefore a perfectly futile rule which directs us to
endeavour, in connexion with this basis, to turn the
word in question to suit our own purpose, since, if
this is feasible, there is no ambiguity. In cases of
ambiguity the only questions which confront us will
be, sometimes which of the two interpretations is
most natural, and always which interpretation is
most equitable, and what was the intention of the
person who wrote or uttered the words. I have,
however, given sufficient instructions in the course
of my remarks on conjecture and quality, as to the
method of treating such questions, whether by the
prosecution or the defence. 