The question is not infrequently asked, as
to whether, admitting that these things ought to
be learned, it is possible for all of them to be
taught and taken in simultaneously. There are
some who say that this is impossible on the ground
that the mind is confused and tired by application
to so many studies of different tendencies neither
the intelligence nor the physique of our pupils, nor the time at our disposal are sufficient, they say, and
even though older boys may be strong enough, it is
a sin to put such a burden on the shoulders of childhood. These critics show an insufficient appreciation of the capacities of the human mind, which
is so swift and nimble and versatile, that it cannot
be restricted to doing one thing only, but insists on
devoting its attention to several different subjects not
merely in one day, but actually at one and the
same time. Do not harpists simultaneously exert
the memory and pay attention to the tone and
inflexions of the voice, while the right hand runs
over certain strings and the left plucks, stops or
releases others, and even the foot is employed in
beating time, all these actions being performed at
the same moment Again, do not we ourselves,
when unexpectedly called upon to plead, speak
while we are thinking what we are to say next,
invention of argument, choice of words, rhythm,
gesture, delivery, facial expression and movement all
being required simultaneously If all these things
can be done with one effort in spite of their
diversity, why should we not divide our hours among
different branches of study We must remember
that variety serves to refresh and restore the mind,
and that it is really considerably harder to work at
one subject without intermission. Consequently we
should give the pen a rest by turning to read, and
relieve the tedium of reading by changes of subject.
However manifold our activities, in a certain sense
we come fresh to each new subject. Who can
maintain his attention, if he has to listen for a
whole day to one teacher harping on the same
subject, be it what it may Change of studies is like change of foods the stomach is refreshed by
their variety and derives greater nourishment from
variety of viands. If my critics disagree, let them
provide me with an alternative method. Are we
first to deliver ourselves up to the sole service of
the teacher of literature, and then similarly to the
teacher of geometry, neglecting under the latter
what was taught us by the former And then are
we to go on to the musician, forgetting all that we
learned before And when we study Latin literature, are we to do so to the exclusion of Greek In
fine, to have done with the matter once and for all,
are we to do nothing except that which last comes
to our hand On this principle, why not advise
farmers not to cultivate corn, vines, olives and
orchard trees at the same time or from devoting
themselves simultaneously to pastures, cattle, gardens, bees and poultry Why do we ourselves daily
allot some of our time to the business of the courts,
some to the demands of our friends, some to our
domestic affairs, some to the exercise of the body,
and some even to our pleasures Any one of these
occupations, if pursued without interruption, would
fatigue us. So much easier is it to do many things
than to do one thing for a long time continuously. We need have no fear at any rate that boys will
find their work too exhausting there is no age more
capable of enduring fatigue. The fact may be surprising, but it can be proved by experiment. For
the mind is all the easier to teach before it is set. This
may be clearly proved by the fact that within two
years after a child has begun to form words correctly,
he can speak practically all without any pressure
from outside. On the other hand how many years it takes for our newly-imported slaves to become
familiar with the Latin language. Try to teach an
adult to read and you will soon appreciate the force
of the saying applied to those who do everything
connected with their art with the utmost skill Moreover boys stand the strain of
work better than young men. Just as small children
suffer less damage from their frequent falls, from
their crawling on hands and knees and, a little later,
from their incessant play and their running about
from morn till eve, because they are so light in
weight and have so little to carry, even so their
minds are less susceptible of fatigue, because their
activity calls for less effort and application to study
demands no exertion of their own, since they are
merely so much plastic material to be moulded by
the teacher. And further owing to the general
pliability of childhood, they follow their instructors
with greater simplicity and without attempting to
measure their own progress for as yet they do not
even appreciate the nature of their work. Finally, as
I have often noticed, the senses are less affected by
mere hard work than they are by hard thinking. Moreover there will never be more time for such
studies, since at this age all progress is made through
listening to the teacher. Later when the boy has to
write by himself, or to produce and compose something out of his own head, he will neither have the time
nor the inclination for the exercises which we have
been discussing. Since, then, the teacher of literature
neither can nor ought to occupy the whole day, for
fear of giving his pupil a distaste for work, what are
the studies to which the spare time should preferably
be devoted For I do not wish the student to wear himself out in such pursuits I would not have him sing
or learn to read music or dive deep into the minuter
details of geometry, nor need he be a finished actor in
his delivery or a dancer in his gesture if I did demand all these accomplishments, there would yet be
time for them; the period allotted to education is
long, and I am not speaking of duller wits. Why did
Plato bear away the palm in all these branches of
knowledge which in my opinion the future orator
should learn I answer, because he was not merely content with the teaching which Athens was able to provide or even with that of the Pythagoreans whom he
visited in Italy, but even approached the priests of
Egypt and made himself thoroughly acquainted with
all their secret lore. The plea of the difficulty of the subject is put
forward merely to cloak our indolence, because we
do not love the work that lies before us nor seek to
win eloquence for our own because it is a noble art
and the fairest thing in all the world, but gird up
our loins for mercenary ends and for the winning of
filthy lucre. Without such accomplishments many may
speak in the courts and make an income; but it is
my prayer that every dealer in the vilest merchandise
may be richer than they and that the public crier
may find his voice a more lucrative possession. And
I trust that there is not one even among my readers
who would think of calculating the monetary value
of such studies. But he that has enough of the
divine spark to conceive the ideal eloquence, he who,
as the great tragic poet says, regards as and seeks not the transitory gains of advocacy, but those stable and lasting
rewards which his own soul and knowledge and contemplation can give, he will easily persuade himself to spend his time not, like so many, in the theatre
or in the Campus Martius, in dicing or in idle talk,
to say naught of the hours that are wasted in sleep
or long drawn banqueting, but in listening rather to
the geometrician and the teacher of music. For by
this he will win a richer harvest of delight than can
ever be gathered from the pleasures of the ignorant,
since among the many gifts of providence to man
not the least is this that the highest pleasure is the
child of virtue. But the attractions of my theme
have led me to say overmuch. Enough of those
studies in which a boy must be instructed, while he
is yet too young to proceed to greater things My
next book will start afresh and will pass to the consideration of the duties of the teacher of rhetoric. div1