I have made my remarks on this stage of
education as brief as possible, making no attempt to
say everything, for the theme is infinite, but confining myself to the most necessary points. I will
now proceed briefly to discuss the remaining arts in
which I think boys ought to be instructed before
being handed over to the teacher of rhetoric for it is by such studies that the course of education described by the Greeks as or general
education will be brought to its full completion. For there are other subjects of education which
must be studied simultaneously with literature.
These being independent studies are capable of completion without a knowledge of oratory, while on the
other hand they cannot by themselves produce an
orator. The question has consequently been raised
as to whether they are necessary for this purpose. What, say some, has the knowledge of the way to
describe an equilateral triangle on a given straight
line got to do with pleading in the law-courts or
speaking in the senate Will an acquaintance with
the names and intervals of the notes of the lyre help
an orator to defend a criminal or direct the policy
of his country They will perhaps produce a long
list of orators who are most effective in the courts
but have never sat under a geometrician and whose
understanding of music is confined to the pleasure
which their ears, like those of other men, derive
from it. To such critics I reply, and Cicero frequently
makes the same remark in his Orator, that I am
not describing any orator who actually exists or has
existed, but have in my mind's eye an ideal orator,
perfect down to the smallest detail. For when the
philosophers describe the ideal sage who is to be
consummate in all knowledge and a very god incarnate, as they say, they would have him receive
instruction not merely in the knowledge of things
human and divine, but would also lead him through
a course of subjects, which in themselves are comparatively trivial, as for instance the elaborate
subtleties of formal logic not that acquaintance with the so called or problems
can make a man wise, but because it is important that he should never trip even in the
smallest trifles. So too the teacher of geometry,
music or other subjects which I would class with
these, will not be able to create the perfect orator
who like the philosopher ought to be a wise man,
but none the less these arts will assist in his perfection. I may draw a parallel from the use of antidotes
and other remedies applied to the eyes or to wounds.
We know that these are composed of ingredients
which produce many and sometimes contrary effects,
but mixed together they make a single compound
resembling no one of its component parts, but
deriving its peculiar properties from all so too dumb
insects produce honey, whose taste is beyond the
skill of man to imitate, from different kinds of flowers
and juices. Shall we marvel then, if oratory, the
highest gift of providence to man, needs the assistance
of many arts, which, although they do not reveal or
intrude themselves in actual speaking, supply hidden
forces and make their silent presence felt it will be urged Granted, but I am in quest of an orator. Yes, but we shall
never attain completeness, if minor details be
lacking. And it will be agreed that though our
ideal of perfection may dwell on a height that is hard
to gain, it is our duty to teach all we know, that
achievement may at least come somewhat nearer
the goal. But why should our courage fail The
perfect orator is not contrary to the laws of nature,
and it is cowardly to despair of anything that is
within the bounds of possibility. For myself I should be ready to accept the verdict
of antiquity. Who is ignorant of the fact that
music, of which I will speak first, was in ancient
times the object not merely of intense study but of
veneration in fact Orpheus and Linus, to mention
no others, were regarded as uniting the roles of musician, poet and philosopher. Both were of divine
origin, while the former, because by the marvel of
his music he soothed the savage breast, is recorded
to have drawn after him not merely beasts of the
wild, but rocks and trees. So too Timagenes
asserts that music is the oldest of the arts related to
literature, a statement which is confirmed by the testimony of the greatest of poets in whose songs we read
that the praise of heroes and of gods were sung to
the music of the lyre at the feasts of kings. Does not
lopas, the Vergilian bard, sing and the like whereby the supreme poet manifests most clearly that music is united with the
knowledge even of things divine. If this be admitted, music will be a necessity even for an orator,
since those fields of knowledge, which were annexed
by philosophy on their abandonment by oratory,
once were ours and without the knowledge of all
such things there can be no perfect eloquence. There can in any case be no doubt that some of
those men whose wisdom is a household word have
been earnest students of music Pythagoras for
instance and his followers popularised the belief,
which they no doubt had received from earlier
teachers, that the universe is constructed on the
same principles which were afterwards imitated in the construction of the lyre, and not content merely
with emphasising that concord of discordant elements
which they style harmony attributed a sound to the
motions of the celestial bodies. As for Plato, there
are certain passages in his works, more especially in
the Timaeus, which are quite unintelligible to those
who have not studied the theory of music. But
why speak only of the philosophers, whose master,
Socrates, did not blush to receive instruction in playing the lyre even when far advanced in years It is
recorded that the greatest generals played on the
lyre and the pipe, and that the armies of Sparta were
fired to martial ardour by the strains of music. And
what else is the function of the horns and trumpets
attached to our legions The louder the concert of
their notes, the greater is the glorious supremacy of
our arms over all the nations of the earth. It was
not therefore without reason that Plato regarded the
knowledge of music as necessary to his ideal statesman or politician, as he calls him; while the leaders
even of that school, which in other respects is the
strictest and most severe of all schools of philosophy,
held that the wise man might well devote some of
his attention to such studies. Lycurgus himself, the
founder of the stern laws of Sparta, approved of the
training supplied by music. Indeed nature itself
seems to have given music as a boon to men to lighten
the strain of labour even the rower in the galleys
is cheered to effort by song. Nor is this function of
music confined to cases where the efforts of a number
are given union by the sound of some sweet voice
that sets the tune, but even solitary workers find
solace at their toil in artless song. So far I have
attempted merely to sound the praises of the noblest of arts without bringing it into connexion with the
education of an orator. I will therefore pass by the
fact that the art of letters and that of music were
once united indeed Archytas and Euenus held
that the former was subordinate to the latter, while
we know that the same instructors were employed
for the teaching of both from Sophron, a writer of
farces, it is true, but so highly esteemed by Plato,
that he is believed to have had Sophron's works
under his pillow on his deathbed the same fact is
proved by the case of Eupolis, who makes Prodamus
teach both music and literature, and whose Maricas,
who was none other than Hyperbolus in disguise,
asserts that he knows nothing of music but letters.
Aristophanes again in more than one of his plays
shows that boys were trained in music from remote
antiquity, while in the Hypobolimaeus of Menander
an old man, when a father claims his son from him,
gives an account of all expenses incurred on behalf
of the boy's education and states that he has paid
out large sums to musicians and geometricians. From the importance thus given to music also originated the custom of taking a lyre round the company
after dinner, and when on such an occasion Themistocles confessed that he could not play, his education
was to quote the words of Cicero Even at the banquets of our own forefathers
it was the custom to introduce the pipe and lyre, and
even the hymn of the Salii has its tune. These
practices were instituted by King Numa and clearly
prove that not even those whom we regard as rude
warriors, neglected the study of music, at least in so
far as the resources of that age allowed. Finally
there was actually a proverb among the Greeks, that the uneducated were far from the company of
the Muses and Graces. But let us discuss the
advantages which our future orator may reasonably
expect to derive from the study of Music. Music has two modes of expression in the voice
and in the body; for both voice and body require
to be controlled by appropriate rules. Aristoxenus
divides music, in so far as it concerns the voice, into
rhythm and melody, the one consisting in measure,
the latter in sound and song. Now I ask you whether
it is not absolutely necessary for the orator to be
acquainted with all these methods of expression
which are concerned firstly with gesture, secondly
with the arrangement of words and thirdly with the
inflexions of the voice, of which a great variety are
required in pleading. Otherwise we must assume
that structure and the euphonious combination of
sounds are necessary only for poetry, lyric and otherwise, but superfluous in pleading, or that unlike
music, oratory has no interest in the variation of
arrangement and sound to suit the demands of the
case. But eloquence does vary both tone and rhythm,
expressing sublime thoughts with elevation, pleasing
thoughts with sweetness, and ordinary with gentle
utterance, and in every expression of its art is in
sympathy with the emotions of which it is the mouthpiece. It is by the raising, lowering or inflexion of
the voice that the orator stirs the emotions of his
hearers, and the measure, if I may repeat the term,
of voice or phrase differs according as we wish
to rouse the indignation or the pity of the judge.
For, as we know, different emotions are roused even
by the various musical instruments, which are
incapable of reproducing speech. Further the motion of the body must be suitable and becoming,
or as the Greeks call it eurythmic, and this can only
be secured by the study of music. This is a most
important department of eloquence, and will receive
separate treatment in this work. To proceed, an
orator will assuredly pay special attention to his
voice, and what is so specially the concern of music
as this Here too I must not anticipate a later
section of this work, and will content myself by
citing the example of Gaius Gracchus, the leading
orator of his age, who during his speeches had a
musician standing behind him with a pitchpipe, or
tonarion as the Greeks call it, whose duty it was to
give him the tones in which his voice was to be
pitched. Such was the attention which he paid to
this point even in the midst of his most turbulent
speeches, when he was terrifying the patrician party
and even when he had begun to fear their power.
I should like for the benefit of the uninstructed,
those as the saying
is, to remove all doubts as to the value of music. They will at any rate admit that the poets should be
read by our future orator. But can they be read
without some knowledge of music Or if any of
my critics be so blind as to have some doubts about
other forms of poetry, can the lyric poets at any
rate be read without such knowledge If there
were anything novel in my insistence on the study
of music, I should have to treat the matter at
greater length. But in view of the fact that the
study of music has, from those remote times when
Chiron taught Achilles down to our own day, continued to be studied by all except those who
have a hatred for any regular course of study, it would be a mistake to seem to cast any doubt upon
its value by showing an excessive zeal in its defence. It will, however, I think be sufficiently clear from
the examples I have already quoted, what I regard
as the value and the sphere of music in the training
of an orator. Still I think I ought to be more
emphatic than I have been in stating that the music
which I desire to see taught is not our modern music,
which has been emasculated by the lascivious melodies of our effeminate stage and has to no small
extent destroyed such manly vigour as we still
possessed. No, I refer to the music of old which was
employed to sing the praises of brave men and was
sung by the brave themselves. I will have none
of your psalteries and viols, that are unfit even for
the use of a modest girl. Give me the knowledge
of the principles of music, which have power to
excite or assuage the emotions of mankind. We
are told that Pythagoras on one occasion, when some
young men were led astray by their passions to
commit an outrage on a respectable family, calmed
them by ordering the piper to change her strain to a
spondaic measure, while Chrysippus selects a special
tune to be used by nurses to entice their little charges
to sleep. Further I may point out that among the
fictitious themes employed in declamation is one,
doing no little credit to its author's learning, in
which it is supposed that a piper is accused of manslaughter because he had played a tune in the Phrygian mode as an accompaniment to a sacrifice, with
the result that the person officiating went mad and
flung himself over a precipice. If an orator is
expected to declaim on such a theme as this, which
cannot possibly be handled without some knowledge of music, how can my critics for all their prejudice
fail to agree that music is a necessary element in
the education of an orator As regards geometry, it is granted that portions of
this science are of value for the instruction of children
for admittedly it exercises their minds, sharpens
their wits and generates quickness of perception.
But it is considered that the value of geometry
resides in the process of learning, and not as with
other sciences in the knowledge thus acquired.
Such is the general opinion. But it is not without
good reason that some of the greatest men have
devoted special attention to this science. Geometry
has two divisions; one is concerned with numbers,
the other with figures. Now knowledge of the former
is a necessity not merely to the orator, but to any
one who has had even an elementary education.
Such knowledge is frequently required in actual
cases, in which a speaker is regarded as deficient in education, I will not say if he hesitates
in making a calculation, but even if he contradicts
the calculation which he states in words by making
an uncertain or inappropriate gesture with his fingers.
Again linear geometry is frequently required in
cases, as in lawsuits about boundaries and measurements. But geometry and oratory are related in a
yet more important way than this. In the first
place logical development is one of the necessities
of geometry. And is it not equally a necessity for
oratory Geometry arrives at its conclusions from
definite premises, and by arguing from what is certain
proves what was previously uncertain. Is not this
just what we do in speaking Again are not the
problems of geometry almost entirely solved by the syllogistic method, a fact which makes the majority
assert that geometry bears a closer resemblance to
logic than to rhetoric But even the orator will
sometimes, though rarely, prove his point by formal
logic. For, if necessary, he will use the syllogism,
and he will certainly make use of the enthymeme
which is a rhetorical form of syllogism. Further
the most absolute form of proof is that which is
generally known as linear demonstration. And what
is the aim of oratory if not proof Again oratory
sometimes detects falsehoods closely resembling the
truth by the use of geometrical methods. An
example of this may be found in connexion with
numbers in the so-called pseudographs, a favourite
amusement in our boyhood. But there are more
important points to be considered. Who is there
who would not accept the following proposition But this is false, for everything depends on
the shape of the figure formed by these lines, and
historians have been taken to task by geometricians
for believing the time taken to circumnavigate an
island to be a sufficient indication of its size. For
the space enclosed is in proportion to the perfection
of the figure. Consequently if the bounding line
to which we have referred form a circle, the most
perfect of all plane figures, it will contain a greater
space than if the same length of line took the form
of a square, while a square contains a greater space
than a triangle having the same total perimeter, and
an equilateral triangle than a scalene triangle. But
there are other points which perhaps present greater difficulty. I will take an example which is easy
even for those who have no knowledge of geometry.
There is scarcely anyone who does not know that
the Roman acre is 240 feet long and 120 feet
broad, and its total perimeter and the area enclosed
can easily be calculated. But a square of 180 feet
gives the same perimeter, yet contains a much
larger area within its four sides. If the calculation
prove irksome to any of my readers, he can learn the
same truth by employing smaller numbers. Take a
ten foot square its perimeter is forty feet and it
contains 100 square feet. But if the dimensions be
fifteen feet by five, while the perimeter is the same,
the area enclosed is less by a quarter. On the other
hand if we draw a parallelogram measuring nineteen
feet by one, the number of square feet enclosed will
be no greater than the number of linear feet making
the actual length of the parallelogram, though the
perimeter will be exactly as that of the figure which
encloses an area of 100 square feet. Consequently the
area enclosed by four lines will decrease in proportion
as we depart from the form of a square. It further
follows that it is perfectly possible for the space
enclosed to be less, though the perimeter be greater.
This applies to plane figures only for even one who
is no mathematician can see that, when we have to
consider hills or valleys, the extent of ground enclosed
is greater than the sky over it. But geometry soars
still higher to the consideration of the system of
the universe for by its calculations it demonstrates
the fixed and ordained courses of the stars, and
thereby we acquire the knowledge that all things
are ruled by order and destiny, a consideration
which may at times be of value to an orator. When Pericles dispelled the panic caused at Athens by the
eclipse of the sun by explaining the causes of the
phenomenon, or Sulpicius Gallus discoursed on the
eclipse of the moon to the army of Lucius Paulus to
prevent the soldiers being seized with terror at what
they regarded as a portent sent by heaven, did not
they discharge the function of an orator If Nicias
had known this when he commanded in Sicily, he
would not have shared the terror of his men nor lost
the finest army that Athens ever placed in the field.
Dion for instance when he came to Syracuse to overthrow the tyranny of Dionysius, was not frightened
away by the occurrence of a similar phenomenon.
However we are not concerned with the uses of
geometry in war and need not dwell upon the fact
that Archimedes singlehanded succeeded in appreciably prolonging the resistance of Syracuse when it
was besieged. It will suffice for our purpose that
there are a number of problems which it is difficult
to solve in any other way, which are as a rule solved
by these linear demonstrations, such as the method
of division, section to infinity, and the ratio of increase in velocity. From this we may conclude that,
if as we shall show in the next book an orator has
to speak on every kind of subject, he can under
no circumstances dispense with a knowledge of
geometry. XI. The comic actor will also claim a certain
amount of our attention, but only in so far as our
future orator must be a master of the art of delivery.
For I do not of course wish the boy, whom we are
training to this end, to talk with the shrillness of a
woman or in the tremulous accents of old age. Nor
for that matter must he ape the vices of the drunkard, or copy the cringing manners of a slave,
or learn to express the emotions of love, avarice or
fear. Such accomplishments are not necessary to
an orator and corrupt the mind, especially while it
is still pliable and unformed. For repeated imitation passes into habit. Nor yet again must we
adopt all the gestures and movements of the actor.
Within certain limits the orator must be a master of
both, but he must rigorously avoid staginess and all
extravagance of facial expression, gesture and gait.
For if an orator does command a certain art in such
matters, its highest expression will be in the concealment of its existence. What then is the duty of the teacher whom
we have borrowed from the stage In the
first place he must correct all faults of pronunciation, and see that the utterance is distinct,
and that each letter has its proper sound.
There is an unfortunate tendency in the case of
some letters to pronounce them either too thinly
or too fully, while some we find too harsh and fail to
pronounce sufficiently, substituting others whose
sound is similar but somewhat duller. For instance,
lambda is substituted for rho, a letter which was
always a stumbling-block to Demosthenes; our l
and r have of course the same value. Similarly
when c and g are not given their full value, they
are softened into t and d. Again our teacher must
not tolerate the affected pronunciation of s with
which we are painfully familiar, nor suffer words
to be uttered from the depths of the throat or rolled out hollow-mouthed, or permit the natural
sound of the voice to be over-laid with a fuller
sound, a fault fatal to purity of speech; the
Greeks give this peculiarity the name plastered over, a term applied to the
tone produced by a pipe, when the stops which
produce the treble notes are closed, and a bass note
is produced through the main aperture only. He
will also see that final syllables are not clipped, that
the quality of speech is continuously maintained,
that when the voice is raised, the strain falls upon
the lungs and not the mouth, and that gesture and
voice are mutually appropriate. He will also insist
that the speaker faces his audience, that the lips
are not distorted nor the jaws parted to a grin,
that the face is not thrown back, nor the eyes fixed
on the ground, nor the neck slanted to left or right.
For there are a variety of faults of facial expression.
I have seen many, who raised their brows whenever
the voice was called upon for an effort, others who
wore a perpetual frown, and yet others who could
not keep their eyebrows level, but raised one
towards the top of the head and depressed the
other till it almost closed the eye. These are
details, but as I shall shortly show, they are of
enormous importance, for nothing that is unbecoming
can have a pleasing effect. Our actor will also be required to show how a
narrative should be delivered, and to indicate the
authoritative tone that should be given to advice,
the excitement which should mark the rise of anger,
and the change of tone that is characteristic of
pathos. The best method of so doing is to select
special passages from comedy appropriate for the purpose, that is to say, resembling the speeches of
a pleader. These are not only most useful in training the delivery, but are admirably adapted to
increase a speaker's eloquence. These are the
methods to be employed while the pupil is too young
to take in more advanced instruction; but when
the time has come for him to read speeches, and as
soon as he begins to appreciate their merits, he
should have a careful and efficient teacher at his
side not merely to form his style of reading aloud,
but to make him learn select passages by heart and
declaim them standing in the manner which actual
pleading would require thus he will simultaneously
train delivery, voice and memory. I will not blame even those who give a certain
amount of time to the teacher of gymnastics. I am
not speaking of those, who spend part of their life
in rubbing themselves with oil and part in winebibbing, and kill the mind by over-attention to the
body indeed, I would have such as these kept
as far as possible from the boy whom we are
training. But we give the same name to those who
form gesture and motion so that the arms may be
extended in the proper manner, the management of
the hands free from all trace of rusticity and
inelegance, the attitude becoming, the movements
of the feet appropriate and the motions of the head
and eyes in keeping with the poise of the body. No
one will deny that such details form a part of the
art of delivery, nor divorce delivery from oratory;
and there can be no justification for disdaining to
learn what has got to be done, especially as
chironomy, which, as the name shows, is the law of
gesture, originated in heroic times and met with the approval of the greatest Greeks, not excepting
Socrates himself, while it was placed by Plato among
the virtues of a citizen and included by Chrysippus
in his instructions relative to the education of
children. We are told that the Spartans even
regarded a certain form of dance as a useful
element in military training. Nor again did the
ancient Romans consider such a practice as disgraceful this is clear from the fact that priestly and
ritual dances have survived to the present day, while
Cicero in the third book of his de Oratore quotes the
words of Crassus, in which he lays down the
principle that the orator And such a method of training has persisted uncensured to our own time. In my
opinion, however, such training should not extend
beyond the years of boyhood, and even boys should
not devote too much time to it. For I do not wish
the gestures of oratory to be modelled on those
of the dance. But I do desire that such boyish
exercises should continue to exert a certain influence, and that something of the grace which we
acquired as learners should attend us in after life
without our being conscious of the fact. 