There is, however, a certain affinity between
all these bases. For in definition we enquire into the
meaning of a term, and in the syllogism, which is
closely connected with definition, we consider what
was the meaning of the writer, while it is obvious
that in the case of contrary laws there are two bases,
one concerned with the letter, and the other with
the intention. Again, definition is in itself a kind of
ambiguity, since it brings out two meanings in the
same term. The basis concerned with the letter and
the intention of the law involves a legal question as
regards the interpretation of the words, which is
identical with the question arising out of contrary
laws. Consequently some writers have asserted that
all these bases may be resolved into those concerned
with the letter and intention, while others hold that
in all cases where the letter and the intention of a
document have to be considered, it is ambiguity that
gives rise to the question at issue. But all these
bases are really distinct, for an obscure point of law
is not the same as an ambiguous point of law.
Definition, then, involves a general question as to
the actual nature of a term, a question which may
conceivably have no connexion whatsoever with the
content of the case in point. In investigations as
to the letter and the intention, the dispute turns on
the provisions contained in the law, whereas the
syllogism deals with that which is not contained in
the law. In disputes arising out of ambiguity we
are led from the ambiguous phrase to its conflicting
meanings, whereas in the case of contrary laws the
fight starts from the conflict of their provisions.
The distinction between these bases has therefore
been rightly accepted by the most learned of rhetoricians, and is still adopted by the majority
and the wisest of the teachers of to-day. It has not been possible in this connexion to give
instructions which will cover the arrangement to be
adopted in every case, though I have been able to
give some. There are other details concerning which
I can give no instructions without a statement of the
particular case on which the orator has to speak.
For not only must the whole case be analysed into
its component topics and questions, but these subdivisions themselves require to be arranged in the
order which is appropriate to them. For example,
in the exordium each part has its own special place,
first, second and third, etc., while each question and
topic requires to be suitably arranged, and the same
is true even of isolated general questions. For it will
not, I imagine, be represented that sufficient skill
in division is possessed by the man who, after resolving a controversial theme into questions such as
the following, whether a hero is to be granted any
reward that he may claim, whether he is allowed to
claim private property, whether he may demand any
woman in marriage, whether he may claim to marry
a woman who already possesses a husband, or this
particular woman, then, although it is his duty to
deal with the first question first, proceeds to deal
with them indiscriminately as each may happen to
occur to him, and ignores the fact that the first
point which should be discussed is whether we
should stand by the letter or the intention of the
law, and fails to follow the natural order, which
demands that after beginning with this question he
should then proceed to introduce the subsidiary
questions, thereby making the structure of his speech as regular as that of the human body, of which, for
example, the hand is a part, while the fingers are
parts of the hand, and the joints of the fingers. It
is precisely this method of arrangement which it is
impossible to demonstrate except with reference to
some definite and specific case. But it is clearly
useless to take one or two cases, or even a hundred
or a thousand, since their number is infinite. It is
the duty of the teacher to demonstrate daily in one
kind of case after another what is the natural order
and connexion of the parts, so that little by little
his pupils may gain the experience which will enable
them to deal with other cases of the same character.
For it is quite impossible to teach everything that
can be accomplished by art. For example, what
painter has ever been taught to reproduce everything
in nature But once he has acquired the general
principles of imitation, he will be able to copy whatever is given him. What vase-maker is there who
has not succeeded in producing a vase of a type
which he had never previously seen There are, however, some things which depend
not on the teacher, but on the learner. For example,
a physician will teach what treatment should be
adopted for different diseases, what the dangers are
against which he must be on his guard, and what
the symptoms by which they may be recognised. But
he will not be able to communicate to his pupil the
gift of feeling the pulse, or appreciating the variations
of colour, breathing and temperature this will
depend on the talent of the individual. Therefore,
in most instances, we must rely on ourselves,
and must study cases with the utmost care, never forgetting that men discovered our art before ever
they proceeded to teach it. For the most effective,
and what is justly styled most economical arrangement of a case as a whole, is that which cannot be
determined except when we have the specific facts
before us. It consists in the power to determine
when the exordium is necessary and when it should
be omitted; when we should make our statement of
facts continuous, and when we should subdivide it;
when we should begin at the very beginning, when,
like Homer, start at the middle or the end; when
we should omit the statement of facts altogether;
when we should begin by dealing with the arguments
advanced by our opponents, and when with our own;
when we should place the strongest proofs first and
when the weakest; in what cases we should prefix
questions to the exordium, and what preparation is
necessary to pave the way for these questions; what
arguments the judge will accept at once, and to
what he requires to be led by degrees; whether we
should refute our opponent's arguments as a whole
or in detail; whether we should reserve emotional
appeals for the peroration or distribute them throughout the whole speech; whether we should speak first
of law or of equity; whether we should first advance
or refute charges as to past offences or the charges
connected with the actual trial; or, again, if the
case is complicated, what order we should adopt,
what evidence or documents of any kind should
be read out in the course of our speech, and what
reserved for a later stage. This gift of arrangement
is to oratory what generalship is to war. The skilled
commander will know how to distribute his forces for battle, what troops he should keep back to
garrison forts or guard cities, to secure supplies, or
guard communications, and what dispositions to make
by land and by sea. But to possess this gift, our
orator will require all the resources of nature, learning
and industrious study. Therefore let no man hope
that he can acquire eloquence merely by the labour
of others. He must burn the midnight oil, persevere
to the end and grow pale with study he must form
his own powers, his own experience, his own
methods he must not require to hunt for his
weapons, but must have them ready for immediate
use, as though they were born with him and not
derived from the instruction of others. The road
may be pointed out, but our speed must be our
own. Art has done enough in publishing the
resources of eloquence, it is for us to know how to
use them. And it is not enough merely to arrange
the various parts each several part has its own
internal economy, according to which one thought
will come first, another second, another third, while
we must struggle not merely to place these thoughts
in their proper order, but to link them together and
give them such cohesion that there will be no trace
of any suture they must form a body, not a congeries
of limbs. This end will be attained if we note what
best suits each position, and take care that the words
which we place together are such as will not clash,
but will mutually harmonise. Thus different facts
will not seem like perfect strangers thrust into
uncongenial company from distant places, but will
be united with what precedes and follows by an
intimate bond of union, with the result that our speech will give the impression not merely of having
been put together, but of natural continuity. I fear,
however, that I have been lured on from one thing to
another and have advanced somewhat too far, since
I find myself gliding from the subject of arrangement to the discussion of the general rules of style,
which will form the opening theme of the next
book. div1