Such are the instruments of which I promised
to give account, the instruments, that is, not merely
of the art, as some have held, but of the orator himself. These are the weapons that he should have
ready to his hand, this the knowledge with which he
must be equipped, while it must be supplemented by
a ready store of words and figures, power of imagination, skill in arrangement, retentiveness of memory
and grace of delivery. But of all these qualities the
highest is that loftiness of soul which fear cannot
dismay nor uproar terrify nor the authority of the
audience fetter further than the respect which is
their due. For although the vices which are its
opposites, such as arrogance, temerity, impudence
and presumption, are all positively obnoxious, still
without constancy, confidence and courage, art, study
and proficiency will be of no avail. You might as
well put weapons into the hands of the unwarlike
and the coward. It is indeed with some reluctance, as it may give rise to misunderstanding, that I say
that even modesty which, though a fault in itself, is
an amiable failing which may easily be the mother of
virtues is on occasion an impediment and has
frequently caused the fruits of genius and study to
consume away in the mildew of obscurity merely
because they have never been displayed to the public
day. But in case any of my readers should still lack
skill to distinguish the precise meaning of each
word, I would have him know that it is not honest
shame that is the object of my criticism, but that
excess of modesty which is really a form of fear
deterring the soul from doing what is its duty to do,
and resulting in confusion of mind, regret that our
task was ever begun, and sudden silence. For who
can hesitate to give the name of fault to a feeling
that makes a man ashamed to do what is right On
the other hand, I am not unwilling that the man who
has got to make a speech should show signs of
nervousness when he rises to his feet, should change
colour and make it clear that he feels the risks of his
position indeed, if these symptoms do not occur
naturally, it will be necessary to simulate them.
But the feeling that stirs us should be due to the
realisation of the magnitude of our task and not to
fear we should be moved, but not to the extent of
collapsing. But the best remedy for such excess
of modesty is confidence however great our natural
timidity of mien, we shall find strength and support
in the consciousness of the nobility of our task. There are also those natural instruments which, as
I mentioned above, may be further improved by
care, such as voice, lungs and grace of carriage
and movement, all of which are of such importance as frequently to give a speaker the reputation for
talent. Our own age has had orators of greater
resource and power, but Trachalus appeared to stand
out above all his contemporaries, when he was speaking. Such was the elect produced by his lofty
stature, the fire of his eye, the dignity of his brow,
the excellence of his gesture, coupled with a voice
which was not almost a tragedian's, as Cicero
demands that it should be, but surpassed the voice
of all tragedians that I have ever heard. At any
rate I remember that, when he was speaking in the
Basilica Julia before the first tribunal, and the four
panels of judges were assembled as usual and the
whole building was full of noise, he could still be
heard and understood and applauded from all four
tribunals at once, a fact which was not complimentary
to the other pleaders. But gifts like these are such
as all may pray for and few are happy enough to
attain. And if we cannot achieve such fortune, we
must even be content to be heard by the court which
we are addressing. Such then should the orator be,
and such are the things which he should know. 