I now turn to arguments, the name under
which we comprise the and of the Greeks, terms which, in spite of
their difference, have much the same meaning. For
the epicheireme which we translate by commentun or
commentatio, there being no alternative, though we
should be wiser to use the Greek name has three
meanings firstly it means anything conceived in
the mind this is not however the sense of which
I am now speaking; secondly it signifies a proposition with a reason, and thirdly a conclusion of an
argument drawn either from denial of consequents or
from incompatibles; although there is some controversy on this point. For there are some who style a
conclusion from consequents an epicheireme, while it
will be found that the majority hold the view that an
epicheireme is a conclusion from incompatibles
wherefore Cornificius styles it a contrarium or argument from contraries. Some again call it a rhetorical
syllogism, others an incomplete syllogism, because
its parts are not so clearly defined or of the same
number as those of the regular syllogism, since such precision is not specially required by the orator.
Valgius translates by aggressio, that is
an attempt. It would however, in my opinion, be
truer to say that it is not our handling of the
subject, but the thing itself which we attempt which
should be called an that is to say the
argument by which we try to prove something and
which, even if it has not yet been stated in so many
words, has been clearly conceived by the mind.
Others regard it not as an attempted or imperfect
proof, but a complete proof, falling under the most
special species of proof; consequently, according to
its proper and most generally received appellation it
must be understood in the sense of a definite conception of some thought consisting of at least three
parts. Some call an a reason, but Cicero
is more correct in calling it a reasoning, although he
too seems to derive this name from the syllogism
rather than anything else; for he calls the
syllogistic basis a ratiocinative basis and quotes philosophers to support him. And since there is a certain kinship between a syllogism and an epicheireme,
it may be thought that he was justified in his use of
the latter term. An is a clear proof; hence
the use of the term by the geometricians. Caecilius
holds that it differs from the epicheireme solely in the
kind of conclusion arrived at and that an apodeixis is
simply an incomplete epicheireme for the same reason
that we said an enthymeme differed from a syllogism.
For an epicheireme is also part of a syllogism. Some
think that an apodeixis is portion of an epicheireme, namely the part containing the proof. But all
authorities, however much they may differ on other
points, define both in the same way, in so far as they
call both a method of proving what is not certain by
means of what is certain. Indeed this is the nature
of all arguments, for what is certain cannot be
proved by what is uncertain. To all these forms of
argument the Greeks give the name of , a
term which, though the literal translation is fides is best translated by probatio But argument has several other meanings.
For the plots of plays composed for acting in the
theatre are called arguments, while Pedianus, when
explaining the themes of the speeches of Cicero,
says The argument is as follows. Cicero himself in
writing to Brutus says, Fearing that I might transfer
something from that source to my Cato, although the
argument is quite different. It is thus clear that all
subjects for writing are so called. Nor is this to be
wondered at, since the term is also in common use
among artists; hence the Vergilian phrase A mighty
argument. Again a work which deals with a number
of different themes is called But the sense with which we are now concerned is
that which provides proof Celsus indeed treats
the terms, proof, indication, credibility, attempt,
simply as different names for the same things, in
which, to my thinking, he betrays a certain confusion of thought. For proof and credibility are not
merely the result of logical processes, but may
equally be secured by inartificial arguments. Now
I have already distinguished signs or, as he prefers
to call them, indications from arguments. Consequently, since an argument is a process of reasoning which provides proof and enables one thing to be
inferred from another and confirms facts which are
uncertain by reference to facts which are certain,
there must needs be something in every case which
requires no proof. Otherwise there will be nothing
by which we can prove anything; there must be
something which either is or is believed to be true,
by means of which doubtful things may be rendered
credible. We may regard as certainties, first, those
things which we perceive by the senses, things for
instance that we hear or see, such as signs or indications; secondly, those things about which there is
general agreement, such as the existence of the gods
or the duty of loving one's parents; thirdly, those
things which are established by law or have passed
into current usage, if not throughout the whole
world, at any rate in the nation or state where the
case is being pleadedthere are for instance many
rights which rest not on law, but on custom; finally,
there are the things which are admitted by either
party, and whatever has already been proved or is
not disputed by our adversary. Thus for instance it
may be argued that since the world is governed by
providence, the state should similarly be governed
by some controlling power it follows that the state
must be so governed, once it is clear that the world
is governed by providence. Further, the man who is
to handle arguments correctly must know the nature
and meaning of everything and their usual effects.
For it is thus that we arrive at probable arguments
or as the Greeks call them. With regard to
credibility there are three degrees. First, the
highest, based on what usually happens, as for instance the assumption that children are loved by their parents. Secondly, there is the highly
probable, as for instance the assumption that a man
in the enjoyment of good health will probably live
till to-morrow. The third degree is found where
there is nothing absolutely against an assumption,
such as that a theft committed in a house was the
work of one of the household. Consequently
Aristotle in the second book of his Rhetoric has
made a careful examination of all that commonly
happens to things and persons, and what things and
persons are naturally adverse or friendly to other
things or persons, as for instance, what is the
natural result of wealth or ambition or superstition,
what meets with the approval of good men, what is
the object of a soldier's or a farmer's desires, and by
what means everything is sought or shunned. For
my part I do not propose to pursue this subject. It
is not merely a long, but an impossible or rather an
infinite task; moreover it is within the compass of
the common understanding of mankind. If, however, anyone wishes to pursue the subject, I have
indicated where he may apply. But all credibility,
and it is with credibility that the great majority of
arguments are concerned, turns on questions such
as the following whether it is credible that a father
has been killed by his son, or that a father has committed incest with his daughter, or to take questions
of an opposite character, whether it is credible that
a stepmother has poisoned her stepchild, or that a
man of luxurious life has committed adultery; or
again whether a crime has been openly committed,
or false evidence given for a small bribe, since each
of these crimes is the result of a special cast of
character as a rule, though not always; if it were always so, there would be no room for doubt, and
no argument. Let us now turn to consider the of arguments, although some hold that they are identical
with the topics which I have already discussed
above. But I do not use this term in its usual
acceptance, namely, commonplaces directed against
luxury, adultery, and the like, but in the sense of
the secret places where arguments reside, and from
which they must be drawn forth. For just as all
kinds of produce are not provided by every country,
and as you will not succeed in finding a particular bird
or beast, if you are ignorant of the localities where
it has its usual haunts or birthplace, as even the
various kinds of fish flourish in different surroundings, some preferring a smooth and others a rocky
bottom, and are found on different shores and in
divers regions you will for instance never catch
a sturgeon or wrasse in Italian waters, so not
every kind of argument can be derived from every
circumstance, and consequently our search requires
discrimination. Otherwise we shall fall into serious
error, and after wasting our labour through lack of
method we shall fail to discover the argument which
we desire, unless assisted by some happy chance.
But if we know the circumstances which give rise to
each kind of argument, we shall easily see, when
we come to a particular what arguments
it contains. Firstly, then, arguments may be drawn from
persons; for, as I have already said, all arguments
fall into two classes, those concerned with things and
those concerned with persons, since causes, time,
place, occasion, instruments, means and the like are all accidents of things. I have no intention of
tracing all the accidents of persons, as many have
done, but shall confine myself to those from which
arguments may be drawn. Such are birth, for
persons are generally regarded as having some
resemblance to their parents and ancestors, a resemblance which sometimes leads to their living
disgracefully or honourably, as the case may be;
then there is nationality, for races have their own
character, and the same action is not probable in the
case of a barbarian, a Roman and a Greek; country
is another, for there is a like diversity in the laws,
institutions and opinions of different states; sex,
since for example a man is more likely to commit a
robbery, a woman to poison; age, since different
actions suit different ages; education and training,
since it makes a great difference who were the instructors and what the method of instruction in each
individual case; bodily constitution, for beauty is
often introduced as an argument for lust, strength as
an argument for insolence, and their opposites for
opposite conduct; fortune, since the same acts are
not to be expected from rich and poor, or from one
who is surrounded by troops of relations, friends or
clients and one who lacks all these advantages;
condition, too, is important, for it makes a great
difference whether a man be famous or obscure, a
magistrate or a private individual, a father or a son,
a citizen or a foreigner, a free man or a slave,
married or unmarried, a father or childless. Nor
must we pass by natural disposition, for avarice,
anger, pity, cruelty, severity and the like may often
be adduced to prove the credibility or the reverse of
a given act; it is for instance often asked whether a man's way of living be luxurious, frugal or parsimonious. Then there is occupation, since a rustic, a
lawyer, a man of business, a soldier, a sailor, a doctor
all perform very different actions. We must also
consider the personal ambitions of individuals, for
instance whether they wish to be thought rich or
eloquent, just or powerful. Past life and previous
utterances are also a subject for investigation, since
we are in the habit of inferring the present from the
past. To these some add passion, by which they
mean some temporary emotion such as anger or fear;
they also add design, which may refer to the past,
present or future. These latter, however, although
accidents of persons, should be referred to that class
of arguments which we draw from causes, as also
should certain dispositions of mind, for example
when we inquire whether one man is the friend or
enemy of another. Names also are treated as
accidents of persons; this is perfectly true, but names
are rarely food for argument, unless indeed they
have been given for some special reasons, such as the
titles of Wise, Great, Pious, or unless the name has
suggested some special thought to the bearer.
Lentulus for instance had the idea of conspiracy
suggested to him by the fact that according to the
Sibylline books and the Responses of the soothsayers the tyranny was promised to three members
of the Cornelian family, and he considered himself to
be the third in succession to Sulla and Cinna, since
he too bore the name Cornelius. On tile other hand
the conceit employed by Euripides where he makes
Eteocles taunt his brother Polynices on the ground
that his name is evidence of character, is feeble in
the extreme. Still a name will often provide the
subject for a jest, witness the frequent jests of Cicero on the name of Verres. Such, then, and the
like are the accidents of persons. It is impossible
to deal with them all either here or in other portions
of this work, and I must content myself with pointing out the lines on which further enquiry should
proceed. I now pass to things of these actions are the most
nearly connected with persons and must therefore be
treated first. In regard to every action the question
arises either Why or Where or When or How or By
what means the action is performed. Consequently
arguments are drawn from the causes of past or future
actions. The matter of these causes, by some called by others falls into two genera, which
are each divided into four species. For the motive
for any action is as a rule concerned with the acquisition, increase, preservation and use of things that are
good or with the avoidance, diminution, endurance
of things that are evil or with escape there from.
All these considerations carry great weight in deliberative oratory as well. But right actions have
right motives, while evil actions are the result of
false opinions, which originate in the things which
men believe to be good or evil. Hence spring errors
and evil passions such as anger, hatred, envy, desire,
hope, ambition, audacity, fear and others of a similar
kind. To these accidental circumstances may often
be added, such as drunkenness or ignorance, which
serve sometimes to excuse and sometimes to prove
a charge, as for instance when a man is said to have
killed one person while lying in wait for another.
Further, motives are often discussed not merely to
convict the accused of the offence with which he is
charged, but also to defend him when he contends that his action was right, that is to say proceeded
from an honourable motive, a theme of which I have
spoken more fully in the third book. Questions
of definition are also at times intimately connected
with motives. Is a man a tyrannicide if he kills a
tyrant by whom he has been detected in the act
of adultery Or is lie guilty of sacrilege who tore
down arms dedicated in a temple to enable him to
drive the enemy from the city Arguments are also
drawn from place. With a view to proving our facts
we consider such questions as whether a place is hilly
or level, near the coast or inland, planted or uncultivated, crowded or deserted, near or far, suitable for
carrying out a given design or the reverse. This is a
topic which is treated most carefully by Cicero in his
pro Milone. These points and the like generally
refer to questions of fact, but occasionally to
questions of law as well. For we may ask whether
a place is public or private, sacred or profane, our
own or another's, just as where persons are concerned
we ask whether a man is a magistrate, a father, a
foreigner. Hence arise such questions as the following. You have committed an assault, but since the
object of your assault was a magistrate, the crime is
lse-majest. Similarly it may be urged in defence, But such points afford matter for
argument when there is a controversy as to the
facts, and matter for enquiry when the dispute
turns on a point of law. Place also frequently affects the quality of an action, for the same action
is not always lawful or seemly under all circumstances, while it makes considerable difference in
what state the enquiry is taking place, for they differ
both in custom and law. Further arguments drawn
from place may serve to secure approval or the
reverse. Ajax for instance in Ovid says Again one of the many charges brought against
Milo was that he killed Clodius on the monument of
his ancestors. Such arguments may also carry
weight in deliberative oratory, as may those drawn
from time, which I shall now proceed to discuss.
Time may, as I have said elsewhere, be understood
in two different senses, general and special. The first
sense is seen in words and phrases such as and whenever we speak
of past, present or future. The second sense occurs
when we speak either of definite periods of time
such as or of fortuitous periods such as Certain Latin writers have thought it a sufficient
distinction to call the general sense and the
special In both senses time is of importance
in advisory speeches and demonstrative oratory, but
not so frequently as in forensic. For questions of law
turn on time, while it also determines the quality of
actions and is of great importance in questions of
fact; for instance, occasionally it provides irrefragable proofs, which may be illustrated by a case which I
have already cited, when one of the signatories to a
document has died before the day on which it was
signed, or when a person is accused of the commission of some crime, although he was only an infant
at the time or not yet born. Further, all kinds of
arguments may easily be drawn either from facts
previous to a certain act, or contemporary or subsequent. As regards antecedent facts the following
example will illustrate my meaning; Motives of actions may also belong to
past time. Some writers have shown themselves
over-subtle in their classification of the second class
of circumstances, making an
example of circumstances combined with an act and an instance of circumstances
attached to an act. As regards subsequent circumstances I may cite accusations such as The counsel for the defence will
employ the same divisions of time to discredit the
charge which is brought against him. In these
considerations are included everything in connexion
with words and deeds, but in two distinct ways.
For some things are done because something else is
like to follow, and others because something else
has previously been done, as for instance, when the
husband of a beautiful woman is accused of having
acted as a procurer on the ground that he bought
her after she was found guilty of adultery, or
when a debauched character is accused of parricide on the ground that he said to his father For in the former case the accused is not a procurer
because he bought the woman, but bought her
because he was a procurer, while in the latter the
accused is not a parricide because he used these
words, but used them because lie intended to kill his
father. With regard to accidental circumstances,
which also provide matter for arguments, these
clearly belong to subsequent time, but are distinguished by a certain special quality, as for instance if
I should say, ;; ;
or referring to bad qualities, ; We must also
consider the resources possessed by the parties
concerned, more especially when dealing with questions of fact; for it is more credible that a smaller
number of persons were killed by a larger, a weaker
party by a stronger, sleepers by men that were wide
awake, the unsuspecting by the well-prepared, while
the converse arguments may be used to prove the
opposite. Such considerations arise both in deliberative and forensic oratory in the latter they occur
in relation to two questions, namely, whether some
given person had the will, and whether lie had the
power to do the deed; for hope will often create
the will to act. Hence the well-known inference in
Cicero With resources we may couple instruments, which form part of resources and
means. But sometimes instruments will provide us
with indications as well, as for instance if we find
a javelin sticking in a dead body. To these we may
add manner, the Greek in regard to which
we ask how a thing was done. Manner is concerned
sometimes with quality and the letter of the law
we may for instance argue that it was unlawful to
kill an adulterer by poison, sometimes with questions of fact, as for example if I argue that an act
was committed with a good intent and therefore
openly, or with a bad intent and therefore treacherously, by night, in a lonely place. In all cases, however, in which we enquire into the
nature and meaning of an act, and which can be
considered by themselves apart from all considerations of persons and all else that gives rise to the
actual cause, there are clearly three points to which
we must give attention, namely Whether it is, What
it is and Of what kind it is. But as there are certain of argument which are common to
all three questions, this triple division is impracticable and we must therefore consider these questions rather in connexion with those in
which they most naturally arise. Arguments, then,
may be drawn from definition, sometimes called
finitio and sometimes finis. Definition is of two
kinds. We may ask whether a particular quality is a
virtue or make a definition precede and ask what is
the nature of a virtue. Such a definition is either
stated in general terms, such as Rhetoric is the science
of speaking well, or in detail, such as Rhetoric is the
science of correct conception, arrangement and utterance,
coupled with a retentive memory and a dignified delivery. Further, we may define a word by giving its content
as in the preceding instances, or by etymology we
may for instance explain assiduus by deriving it from
as and do, locuples by deriving it from copia locorum,
pecuniosus from copiapecorum. Genus, species, difference
and property seem more especially to afford scope for
definition, for we derive arguments from all of these.
Genus is of little use when we desire to prove a
species, but of great value for its elimination. A tree
is not necessarily a plane tree, but that which is not
a tree is certainly not a plane tree; again, a virtue is
not necessarily the virtue of justice, but that which
is not a virtue is certainly not justice. We must
proceed from the genus to the ultimate species; for
example, to say that man is an animal will not
suffice; for animal merely gives us the genus nor
yet will the addition of the words be adequate; for although this epithet gives
us a species, it is common to other animals as well.
If, however, we define man as a rational animal, we
need nothing further to make our meaning clear.
On the other hand species will give us clear proof of
genus, but is of little service for its elimination.
For example, justice is always a virtue, but that
which is not justice may still be a virtue, such as
fortitude, constancy or self-control. Genus therefore
cannot be eliminated by species unless all the species
included in the genus be eliminated, as for instance
in the following sentence That which is neither rational nor mortal nor an animal is not a man. To these they
add property and difference. Properties serve to
establish definitions, differences to overthrow them.
A property is that which happens to one particular
object and that alone; speech and laughter for
instance are properties of man. Or it may be something specially belonging to an object, but not to it
alone; heating for instance is a property of fire. The
same thing may also have a number of properties
light and heat are both properties of fire. Consequently, the omission of any property in a definition
will impair it, but the introduction of a property,
whatever it may be, will not necessarily establish a
definition. We have, however, often to consider
what is a property of some given object; for example,
if it should be asserted, on the ground of etymology,
that the peculiar property of a tyrannicide is to kill
tyrants, we should deny it for an executioner is not
ipso facto a tyrannicide, if he executes a tyrant who
has been delivered to him for the purpose, nor again
is he a tyrannicide who kills a tyrant unwittingly or
against his will. What is not a property will be a
difference it is, for instance, one thing to be a slave,
and another to be in a state of servitude; hence the
distinction raised in connexion with persons assigned
to their creditors for debt A slave, if he is manumitted becomes a freedman, but this is not the case with
one who is assigned. There are also other points of
difference which are dealt with elsewhere. Again,
the term difference is applied in cases when the
genus is divided into species and one species is subdivided. Animal, for instance, is a genus, mortal a
species, while terrestrial or biped is a difference for
they are not actually properties, but serve to show the difference between such animals and quadrupeds
or creatures of the sea. This distinction, however,
comes under the province not so much of argument
as of exact definition. Cicero separates genus and species, which latter he calls form, from definition
and includes them under relation. For example,
if a person to whom another man has left all his
silver should claim all his silver money as well, he
would base his claim upon genus; on the other hand
if when a legacy has been left to a married woman
holding the position of materfamilias, it should be
maintained that the legacy is not due to a woman
who never came into the power of her husband, the
argument is based on species, since there are two
kinds of marriage. Cicero further shows that
definition is assisted by division, which he distinguishes from partition, making the latter the
dissection of a whole into its parts and the former
the division of a genus into its forms or species. The
number of parts he regards as being uncertain, as for
instance the elements of which a state consists; the
forms or species are, however, certain, as for instance
the number of forms of government, which we are
told are three, democracy, oligarchy, and monarchy.
It is true that he does not use these illustrations,
since, as he was writing to Trebatius, he preferred
to draw his examples from law. I have chosen my
illustrations as being more obvious. Properties have
relation to questions of fact as well; for instance,
it is the property of a good man to act rightly, of an
angry man to be violent in speech or action, and
consequently we believe that such acts are committed by persons of the appropriate character, or not committed by persons of inappropriate character.
For just as certain persons possess certain qualities,
so certain others do not possess certain qualities,
and the argument is of precisely the same nature,
though from opposite premises. In a similar way division is valuable both for proof
and refutation. For proof, it is sometimes enough to
establish one thing. For refutation,
both points must be disproved This may be done in many ways,
and constitutes a form of argument by elimination,
whereby we show sometimes that the whole is false,
sometimes that only that which remains alter the
process of elimination is true. An example of the
first of these two cases would be The residue after elimination is shown to be true as follows By the elimination
of the previous suppositions he is shown to belong to
another. This form of argument is risky and must
be employed with care; for if, in setting forth the
alternatives, we chance to omit one, our whole case
will fail, and our audience will be moved to laughter.
It is safer to do what Cicero does in the pro
Caecina, when he asks, For thus all other points are eliminated at
one swoop. Or again two contrary propositions may be
advanced, either of which if established would suffice to prove the case. Take the following example
from Cicero Or
we may give our opponent the choice between two
alternatives of which one must necessarily be true,
and as a result, whichever he chooses, lie will
damage his case. Cicero does this in the pro
Oppio and in the pro Vareno He then shows
that either admission tells against his opponent.
Sometimes again, two propositions are stated of such
a character that the admission of either involves
the same conclusion, as in the sentence, or as in
the common dilemma, or, As there are three divisions of time, so the order
of events falls into three stages. For everything has a
beginning, growth and consummation, as for instance a quarrel, blows, murder. Thus arise arguments which
lend each other mutual support; for the conclusion
is inferred from the beginnings, as in the following
case ; or the
beginning may be inferred from the conclusion
for instance the fact that Sulla resigned the dictatorship is an argument that Sulla did not take up
arms with the intention of establishing a tyranny.
Similarly from the growth of a situation we may
infer either its beginning or its end, not only in
questions of fact but as regards points of equity,
such as whether the conclusion is referable to the
beginning, that is, Arguments are also drawn from similarities To this class belongs
the type of argument called by the Greeks,
induction by Cicero. Or arguments may be drawn
from unlikes  Or
from contraries   Or
from contradictions Or from consequences necessary or probable  And such arguments
may also be reversed. Similar to these are the
following arguments, which must therefore be
classed under this same head, since it is to this
that they naturally belong   However, such arguments, being incontrovertible,
are of the nature of absolute indications. These,
however, I call consequent or goodness, for
instance, is consequent on wisdom while in regard
to things which merely have taken place afterwards or
will take place I use the term insequent or though I do not regard the question of terminology
as important. Give them any name you please, as
long as the meaning is clear and it is shown that
the one depends on time, the other on the
nature of things. I have therefore no hesitation in
calling the following forms of argument also consequential, although they argue from the past to the
future some however divide them into two classes,
those concerned with action, as in the pro Oppio, and those concerned with time, as in
the Verrines, Both these instances are of such a nature that the argument is
reversible. For it is a necessary consequence that
those who could not be taken to the province
against their will could not be retained against their
will. So too I feel clear that we should rank as
consequential arguments those derived from facts
which lend each other mutual support and are by
some regarded as forming a separate kind of argument, which they call arguments
from things mutually related, while Cicero styles
them arguments drawn from things to which the
same line of reasoning applies; take the following
example or Such also is the fine sentence of Domitius Afer,
which has the same effect, though it is not identical
in form Arguments which prove the same thing from opposites
are also mutually consequential; for instance, we may
argue that he who says that the world was created
thereby implies that it is suffering decay, since this
is the property of all created things. There is another very similar form of argument,
which consists in the inference of facts from their
efficient causes or the reverse, a process known as
argument from causes. The conclusion is sometimes
necessary, sometimes generally without being necessarily true. For instance, a body casts a shadow in
the light, and the shadow wherever it falls indicates
the presence of a body. There are other conclusions
which, as I have said, are not necessary, whether as
regards both cause and effect or only one of the two.
For instance, As examples
of necessary conclusions on the other hand I may
cite the following ; and again, or In these
cases the conclusion is correct. On the other hand, Arguments such as the following belong in the main to
the hortative department of oratory But the warning that we
should not necessarily search for the originating
cause is just an example of such error is provided
by the speech of Medea beginning as though her misery or guilt were due to the fact
that there or I might cite the words addressed by Philoctetes
to Paris, By tracing back causes on lines such as these we
may arrive anywhere. But for the fact that Cicero
has done so, I should regard it as absurd to add to
these what is styled the conjugate argument, such as a self-evident fact requiring no proof; or again, Some call these arguments
derived from causes or efficients by the Greek name that is, results; for in such cases the only
point considered is how one thing results from
another. Those arguments which prove the lesser from the
greater or the greater from the less or equals from
equals are styled apposite or comparative. A conjecture as to a fact is confirmed by argument from
something greater in the following sentence ;
from something less, in a sentence such as ; from
something equal in a sentence such as Points of law may be
proved in a similar manner; from something greater,
as in the sentence ; from something less, ; from
something equal, In all these cases we follow the syllogistic
method. The following type of argument on the
other hand is more serviceable in questions turning on definition or quality. I am
content to treat this type of argument as a genus
without going further; others however divide it into
species. For we may argue from several things to
one or from one thing to several; hence arguments
such as We may also argue from a part to a whole,
from genus to species, from that which contains to
that which is contained, from the difficult to the
easy, from the remote to the near, and similarly
from the opposites of all these to their opposites.
Now all these arguments deal with the greater or
the less or else with things that are equal, and if we
follow up such fine distinctions, there will be no
limit to our division into species. For the comparison of things is infinite; things may be more
pleasant, more serious, more necessary, more honourable, more useful. I say no more for fear of falling
into that very garrulity which I deprecate. The
number of examples of these arguments which I
might quote is likewise infinite, but I will only deal
with a very few. As an example of argument from
something greater take the following example from
the pro Caecina As an instance of
argument from something easier, take this passage from the speech against Clodius and Curio The following provides an example of argument from
something more difficult ; and again, For an argument drawn from
something less take this passage from the pro
Caecinaa Well, then, to give a brief
summary of the whole question, arguments are
drawn from persons, causes, place and time which
latter we have divided into preceding, contemporary
and subsequent, from resources under which we
include instruments, from manner that is, how a
thing has been done, from definition, genus, species,
difference, property, elimination, division, beginnings, increase, consummation, likes, unlikes, contradictions, consequents, efficients, effects, results,
and comparison, which is subdivided into several
species. I think I should also add that arguments are
drawn not merely from admitted facts, but from
fictitious suppositions, which the Greeks style and that this latter type of argument falls
into all the same divisions as those which I have mentioned above, since there may be as many
species of fictitious arguments as there are of true
arguments. When I speak of fictitious arguments
I mean the proposition of something which, if true,
would either solve a problem or contribute to its
solution, and secondly the demonstration of the
similarity of our hypothesis to the case under consideration. To make this the more readily intelligible to youths who have not yet left school, I will
first of all illustrate it by examples of a kind familiar
to the young. There is a law to the effect that A certain man fails to support his
parents and none the less objects to going to prison.
He advances the hypothesis that he would be exempt
from such a penalty if he were a soldier, an infant.
or if he were absent from home on the service of
the state. Again in the case where a hero is allowed
to choose his reward we might introduce the
hypotheses of his desiring to make himself a tyrant
or to overthrow the temples of the gods. Such
arguments are specially useful when we are arguing
against the letter of the law, and are thus employed
by Cicero in the pro Caecina Many other examples
might be quoted from the same work. But fictitious
suppositions are also exceedingly useful when we
are concerned with the quality of an act It is useful
also for amplification ;
or again, Such in the main are the usual topics of proof
as specified by teachers of rhetoric, but it is not
sufficient to classify them generically in our instructions, since from each of them there arises an infinite
number of arguments, while it is in the very nature
of things impossible to deal with all their individual
species. Those who have attempted to perform
this latter task have exposed themselves in equal
degree to two disadvantages, saying too much and
yet failing to cover the whole ground. Consequently
the majority of students, finding themselves lost in
an inextricable maze, have abandoned all individual
effort, including even that which their own wits
might have placed within their power, as though
they were fettered by certain rigid laws, and keeping their eyes fixed upon their master have ceased
to follow the guidance of nature. But as it is not
in itself sufficient to know that all proofs are drawn
either from persons or things, because each of these
groups is subdivided into a number of different heads
so he who has learned that arguments must be
drawn from antecedent, contemporary or subsequent facts will not be sufficiently instructed in
the knowledge of the method of handling arguments
to understand what arguments are to be drawn from
the circumstances of each particular case; especially
as the majority of proofs are to be found in the
special circumstances of individual cases and have no connexion with any other dispute, and therefore
while they are the strongest, are also the least
obvious, since, whereas we derive what is common
to all cases from general rules, we have to discover
for ourselves whatever is peculiar to the case which
we have in hand. This type of argument may
reasonably be described as drawn from circumstances, there being no other word to express the
Greek or from those things which are
peculiar to any given case. For instance, in the
case of the priest who having committed adultery
desired to save his own life by means of the law
which gave him the power of saving one life, the
appropriate argument to employ against him would
run as follows For
such an argument follows from the law forbidding
the execution of the adulteress apart from the
adulterer. Again, take the case falling under the
law which lays down that bankers may pay only
half of what they owe, while permitted to recover
the whole of what they are owed. One banker
requires payment of the whole sum owed him by
another banker. The appropriate argument supplied
by the subject to the creditor is that there was
special reason for the insertion of the clause
sanctioning the recovery of the whole of a debt
by a banker, since there was no need of such a law
as against others, inasmuch as all have the right to
recover the whole of a debt from any save a banker.
But while some fresh considerations are bound to
present themselves in every kind of subject, this is
more especially the case in questions turning on the letter of the law, since not merely individual
words, but still more whole phrases are frequently
ambiguous. And these considerations must vary
according to the complexity of laws and other
documents, whether they are in agreement or contradictory, since fact throws light on fact and law on
law as in the following argument It is laid down by law that he
who refuses to defend his father when accused of
treason thereby loses his right to inherit. A son
denies that he is liable to this penalty unless his
father is acquitted. How does he support this contention There is another law to the effect that a
man found guilty of treason shall be banished and
his advocate with him. Cicero in the pro Cluentio
says that Publius Popilius and Tiberius Gutta were
not condemned for receiving bribes to give a false
verdict, but for attempting to bribe the jury. What
is his argument in support of this view That
their accusers, who were themselves found guilty of
bribing the jury, were restored in accordance with
law after winning their case. But the consideration
as to what argument should be put forward requires
no less care than the consideration of the manner in
which we are to prove that which we have put
forward. Indeed in this connexion invention, if
not the most important, is certainly the first consideration. For, just as weapons are superfluous
for one who does not know what his target is, so
too arguments are useless, unless you see in advance
to what they are to be applied. This is a task for
which no formal rules can be laid down. Consequently, though a number of orators, who have
studied the same rules, will use similar kinds of
arguments, one will discover a greater number of
arguments to suit his case than another. Let us
take as an example a controversial theme involving
problems that have little in common with other
cases. The
case is tried before the Amphictyonic council. It is
admitted that the Thebans lent the money and
were not repaid. The whole dispute turns on the
allegation that Alexander had excused the Thessalians from payment of the debt. It is also admitted
that the Thessalians had received no money from
Alexander. The question is therefore whether his
gift is equivalent to his having given them money.
What use will formal topics of argument be in such
a case, unless I first convince myself that the gift of
Alexander made no difference, that he had not the
power to make it, and that he did not make it
The opening of the Thebans' plea presents no
difficulty and is likely to win the approval of the
judges, since they are seeking to recover by right
what was taken from them by force. But out of this
point arises a violent controversy as to the right of
war, since the Thessalians urge that kingdoms and
peoples and the frontiers of nations and cities
depend upon these rights. To meet this argument it is necessary to discover in what respect this case
differs from others which are concerned with property that has fallen into the hands of the victor
the difficulty moreover lies not so much in the
proof as in the way it should be put forward. We
may begin by stating that the rights of war do not
hold good in any matter which can be brought
before a court of justice, and that what is taken
by force of arms can only be retained by force of
arms, and consequently, wherever the rights of war
hold good, there is no room for the functions of
a judge, while on the contrary where the functions
of the judge come into play, the rights of war cease
to have any force. The reason why it is necessary
to discover this principle is to enable us to bring
the following argument into play that prisoners of
war are free on returning to their native land just
because the gains of war cannot be retained except
by the exercise of the same violence by which they
were acquired. Another peculiar feature of the case
is that it is tried before the Amphictyonic council,
and you will remember that we have to employ
different methods in pleading a case before the
centumviral court and before an arbitrator, though
the problems of the cases may be identical. Secondly
we may urge that the right to refuse payment could
not have been conferred by the victor because he
possesses only what he holds, but a right, being
incorporeal, cannot be grasped by the hand. It is
more difficult to discover this principle than, once
discovered, to defend it with arguments such as
that the position of an heir and a conqueror are
fundamentally different, since right passes to the
one and property to the other. It is further an argument peculiar to the subject matter of the case
that the right over a public debt could not have
passed to the victor, because the repayment of a
sum of money lent by a whole people is due to them
all, and as long as any single one of them survives,
he is creditor for the whole amount but the
Thebans were never all of them to a man in Alexander's power. The force of this argument resides
in the fact that it is not based on any external
support, but holds good in itself. Proceeding to
the third line of argument we may note that the
first portion of it is of a more ordinary type, namely
that the right to repayment is not based on the
actual document, a plea which can be supported
by many arguments. Doubt may also be thrown on
Alexander's purpose did he intend to honour them
or to trick them Another argument peculiar to
the subject indeed it practically introduces a new
discussion is that the Thebans may be regarded as
having in virtue of their restoration recovered the
right even though it be admitted that they had lost
it. Again Cassander's purpose may be discussed,
but, as the case is being pleaded before the Amphictyonic council, we shall find that the most powerful
plea that can be urged is that of equity. I make these remarks, not because I think that a
knowledge of the from which arguments
may be derived is useless had I thought so, I
should have passed them bybut to prevent those
who have learnt these rules from neglecting
other considerations and regarding themselves as
having a perfect and absolute knowledge of the
whole subject, and to make them realise that,
unless they acquire a thorough knowledge of the remaining points which I am about to discuss, they
will be the possessors of what I can only call a dumb
science. For the discovery of arguments was not
the result of the publication of text-books, but every
kind of argument was put forward before any rules
were laid down, and it was only later that writers
of rhetoric noted them and collected them for publication. A proof of this is the fact that the examples which they use are old and quoted from the
orators, while they themselves discover nothing new
or that has not been said before. The creators of
the art were therefore the orators, though we owe
a debt of gratitude also to those who have given us
a short cut to knowledge. For thanks to them the
arguments discovered by the genius of earlier orators
have not got to be hunted out and noted down in
detail. But this does not suffice to make an orator
any more than it suffices to learn the art of gymnastic
in school the body must be assisted by continual
practice, self control, diet and above all by nature;
on the other hand none of these are sufficient in
themselves without the aid of art. I would also
have students of oratory consider that all the forms
of argument which I have just set forth cannot be
found in every case, and that when the subject on
which we have to speak has been propounded, it is
no use considering each separate type of argument
and knocking at the door of each with a view to
discovering whether they may chance to serve to
prove our point, except while we are in the position
of mere learners without any knowledge of actual
practice. Such a proceeding merely retards the
process of speaking to an incalculable extent, if
it is always necessary for us to try each single argument and thus learn by experiment what is apt
and suitable to our case. In fact I am not sure that
it will not be an actual obstacle to progress unless
a certain innate penetration and a power of rapid
divination seconded by study lead us straight to the
arguments which suit our case. For just as the
melody of the voice is most pleasing when accompanied by the lyre, yet if the musician's hand be
slow and, unless he first look at the strings and
take their measure, hesitate as to which strings
match the several notes of the voice, it would
be better that he should content himself with the
natural music of the voice unaccompanied by any
instrument; even so our theory of speaking must be
adapted and, like the lyre, attuned to such rules as
these. But it is only by constant practice that we
can secure that, just as the hands of the musician,
even though his eyes be turned elsewhere, produce
bass, treble or intermediate notes by force of habit,
so the thought of the orator should suffer no delay
owing to the variety and number of possible arguments, but that the latter should present themselves
uncalled and, just as letters and syllables require no
thought on the part of a writer, so arguments should
spontaneously follow the thought of the orator. 