I come now to another point in which the
practice of teachers has differed. Some have not been
content with giving directions as to the arrangement of the subjects set them as themes for
declamation, but have developed them at some
length themselves, supplying not merely the proofs,
but the lines upon which the emotional passages
should proceed. Others have merely suggested a
bare outline, and then when the declamations were
over, have indicated the points missed by each
speaker and worked up certain passages with no less
care than they would have used, had they been going
to stand up to speak themselves. Both practices
have their advantages, and therefore I will not give
either the pre-eminence. But if we must choose one
of the two, it will be found more profitable to point
out the right road at the outset, and not merely to
recall the pupil from his error when he has already
gone astray, since in the first place the correction
is only received by the ear, whereas when he is
given a sketch of the various heads of the declamation, he has to take them down and think about
them secondly instruction is always more readily
received than reproof. Indeed those of our pupils
who have a lively disposition are liable in the
present condition of manners to lose their temper
when admonished and to offer silent resistance. That, however, is no reason for refraining from
the public correction of faults; for we must take
the rest of the class into account, who will believe
that whatever has not been corrected by the master
is right. The two methods should be employed
conjointly and in such a way as circumstances may
demand. Beginners must be given a subject sketched out ready for treatment and suitable to
their respective powers. But when they show that
they have formed themselves sufficiently closely on
the models placed before them, it will be sufficient
to give them a few brief hints for their guidance
and to allow them to advance trusting in their own
strength and without external support. Sometimes
they should be left entirely to their own devices,
that they may not be spoilt by the bad habit of
always relying on another's efforts, and so prove incapable of effort and originality. But as soon as
they seem to have acquired a sound conception of
what they ought to say, the teacher's work will be
near completion if they still make some mistakes,
they must be brought back under his guidance. We
may draw a lesson from the birds of the air, whom
we see distributing the food which they have collected in their bills among their weak and helpless
nestlings; but as soon as they are fledged, we see
them teaching their young to leave the nest and fly
round about it, themselves leading the way; finally,
when they have proved their strength, they are given
the freedom of the open sky and left to trust in
themselves. 