I now come to the subject of ornament, in
which, more than in any other department, the orator
undoubtedly allows himself the greatest indulgence.
For a speaker wins but trifling praise if he does no
more than speak with correctness and lucidity; in
fact his speech seems rather to be free from blemish
than to have any positive merit. Even the untrained often possess the gift of invention, and no
great learning need be assumed for the satisfactory
arrangement of our matter, while if any more
recondite art is required, it is generally concealed,
since unconcealed it would cease to be an art, while
all these qualities are employed solely to serve the
interests of the actual case. On the other hand, by
the employment of skilful ornament the orator commends himself at the same time, and whereas his
other accomplishments appeal to the considered
judgment of the learned, this gift appeals to the
enthusiastic approval of the world at large, and the
speaker who possesses it fights not merely with
effective, but with flashing weapons. If in his defence
of Cornelius Cicero had confined himself merely to
instructing the judge and speaking in clear and idiomatic Latin without a thought beyond the interests
of his case, would he ever have compelled the Roman
people to proclaim their admiration not merely by
acclamation, but by thunders of applause No, it
was the sublimity and splendour, the brilliance and
the weight of his eloquence that evoked such clamorous enthusiasm. Nor, again, would his words have
been greeted with such extraordinary approbation if
his speech had been like the ordinary speeches of
every day. In my opinion the audience did not know
what they were doing, their applause sprang neither
from their judgment nor their will; they were seized
with a kind of frenzy and, unconscious of the place in
which they stood, burst forth spontaneously into a
perfect ecstasy of delight. But rhetorical ornament contributes not a little to
the furtherance of our case as well. For when our
audience find it a pleasure to listen, their attention
and their readiness to believe what they hear are
both alike increased, while they are generally filled
with delight, and sometimes even transported by
admiration. The flash of the sword in itself strikes
something of terror to the eye, and we should be
less alarmed by the thunderbolt if we feared its
violence alone, and not its flash as well. Cicero
was right when, in one of his letters to Brutus, he wrote, Aristotle
likewise thinks that the excitement of admiration
should be one of our first aims. But such ornament must, as I have already said,
be bold, manly and chaste, free from all effeminate
smoothness and the false hues derived from artificial
dyes, and must glow with health and vigour. So true
is this, that although, where ornament is concerned,
vice and virtue are never far apart, those who employ
a vicious style of embellishment disguise their vices
with the name of virtue. Therefore let none of our
decadents accuse me of being an enemy to those
who speak with grace and finish. I do not deny the
existence of such a virtue, I merely deny that they
possess it. Shall I regard a farm as a model of good
cultivation because its owner shows me lilies and
violets and anemones and fountains of living water
in place of rich crops and vines bowed beneath their
clusters Shall I prefer the barren plane and myrtles
trimly clipped, to the fruitful olive and the elm that
weds the vine No, let such luxuries delight the rich
but where would their wealth be if they had nought
save theseAgain, is beauty an object of no consideration in the planting of fruit trees Certainly
not For my trees must be planted in due order
and at fixed intervals. What fairer sight is there
than rows of trees planted in chelon which present
straight lines to the eye from whatever angle they be
viewed But it has an additional advantage, since
this form of plantation enables every tree to derive
an equal share of moisture from the soil. When the
tops of my olive trees rise too high, I lop them away,
with the result that their growth expands laterally in a manner that is at once more pleasing to the eye
and enables them to bear more fruit owing to the
increase in the number of branches. A horse whose
flanks are compact is not only better to look upon,
but swifter in speed. The athlete whose muscles
have been formed by exercise is a joy to the eye, but
he is also better fitted for the contests in which he
must engage. In fact true beauty and usefulness
always go hand in hand. It does not, however, require any special ability to
discern the truth of this. It is more important to
note that such seemly ornament must be varied to
suit the nature of the material to which it is applied.
To begin with the primary classification of oratory,
the same form of ornament will not suit demonstrative, deliberative and forensic speeches. For the
oratory of display aims solely at delighting the
audience, and therefore develops all the resources of
eloquence and deploys all its ornament, since it seeks
not to steal its way into the mind nor to wrest the
victory from its opponent, but aims solely at honour
and glory. Consequently the orator, like the hawker
who displays his wares, will set forth before his
audience for their inspection, nay, almost for their
handling, all his most attractive reflexions, all the
brilliance that language and the charm that figures
can supply, together with all the magnificence of
metaphor and the elaborate art of composition that
is at his disposal. For his success concerns himself,
and not his cause. But when it is a question of facts,
and he is confronted by the hard realities of battle,
his last thought will be for his personal glory. Nay,
it is even unseemly to trouble overmuch about words
when the greatest interests are at stake. I would not assert that such themes afford no scope for
ornament, but such ornament as is employed must
be of a more severe, restrained and less obvious
character; above all, it must be adapted to the
matter in hand. For whereas in deliberative oratory
the senate demand a certain loftiness and the people
a certain impetuosity of eloquence, the public cases
of the courts and those involving capital punishment
demand a more exact style. On the other hand, in
private deliberations and lawsuits about trifling sums
of money and there are not a few of these it is more
appropriate to employ simple and apparently unstudied language. For we should be ashamed to
demand the repayment of a loan in rolling periods, or
to display poignant emotion in a case concerned with
water-droppings, or to work ourselves into a perspiration over the return of a slave to the vendor.
But I am wandering from the point. Since rhetorical ornament, like clearness, may
reside either in individual words or groups of words,
we must consider the requirements of both cases.
For although tile canon, that clearness mainly
requires propriety of language and ornament the
skilful use of metaphor, is perfectly sound, it is
desirable that we should realise that without propriety ornament is impossible. But as several words
may often have the same meaning they are called
synonyms, some will be more distinguished, sublime, brilliant, attractive or euphonious than others.
For as those syllables are the most pleasing to the
ear which are composed of the more euphonious
letters, thus words composed of such syllables will
sound better than others, and the more vowel sounds
they contain the more attractive they will be to hear. The same principle governs the linking of word with
word; some arrangements will sound better than
others. But words require to be used in different
ways. For example, horrible things are best described by words that are actually harsh to the
ear. But as a general rule it may be laid down
that the best words, considered individually, are
those which are fullest or most agreeable in sound.
Again, elegant words are always to be preferred
to those which are coarse, and there is no room
for low words in the speech of a cultivated man.
The choice of striking or sublime words will be
determined by the matter in hand; for a word that
in one context is magnificent may be turgid in
another, and words which are all too mean to
describe great things may be suitable enough when
applied to subjects of less importance. And just as
a mean word embedded in a brilliant passage
attracts special attention, like a spot on a bright
surface, so if our style be of a plain character,
sublime and brilliant words will seem incongruous
and tasteless excrescences on a flat surface. In
some cases instinct, and not reason, must supply
the touchstone, as, for example, in the line Here the poet, by inventing the word porca, succeeded in producing an elegant impression, whereas
if lie had used the masculine porcuis, the very reverse
would have been the case. In some cases, however,
the incongruity is obvious enough. It was only the
other day that we laughed with good reason at the
poet who wrote On the other hand, we admire Virgil when he
says For here the epithet is appropriate and prevents
our expecting too much, while the use of the singular
instead of the plural, and the unusual monosyllabic
conclusion of the line, both add to the pleasing effect.
Horace accordingly imitated Virgil in both these
points, when he wrote, Again, our style need not always dwell on the
heights at times it is desirable that it should sink.
For there are occasions when the very meanness of
the words employed adds force to what we say.
When Cicero, in his denunciation of Piso, says, do
you think that his use of the word dray was accidental,
and was not designedly used to increase his audience's
contempt for the man he wished to bring to ruin
The same is true when he says elsewhere, This device may also
serve to carry off a jest, as in the passage of Cicero
where he talks of the or where he speaks of or, again, in the
pro Milone, cries, and talks of On the other hand, this
practice becomes more obtrusive when employed in
the schools, like the phrase that was so much
praised in my boyhood, or
in the same declamation, But such tricks do not always come off, especially in the schools, and often turn the laugh against the
speaker, particularly in the present day, when declamation has become so far removed from reality
and labours under such an extravagant fastidiousness
in the choice of words that it has excluded a good
half of the language from its vocabulary. Words are proper, newly-coined or metaphorical. In
the case of proper words there is a special dignity
conferred by antiquity, since old words, which not
everyone would think of using, give our style a
venerable and majestic air this is a form of ornament
of which Virgil, with his perfect taste, has made
unique use. For his employment of words such as
olli, quianam, moerus, pone and pellacia gives his
work that impressive air of antiquity which is so
attractive in pictures, but which no art of man can
counterfeit. But we must not overdo it, and such
words must not be dragged out from the deepest
darkness of the past. Quaeso is old enough what
need for us to say quaiso Oppido was still used by
my older contemporaries, but I fear that no one
would tolerate it now. At any rate, antegerio, which
means the same, would certainly never be used by
anyone who was not possessed with a passion for
notoriety. What need have we of acrumnosum It
is surely enough to call a thing horridum. Reor may
be tolerated, autumo smacks of tragedy, proles has
become a rarity, while prosapia stamps the man
who uses it as lacking taste. Need I say more
Almost the whole language has changed. But there
are still some old words that are endeared to us by their antique sheen, while there are others that we
cannot avoid using occasionally, such, for example, as
nuncupare and fari there are yet others which it
requires some daring to use, but which may still be
employed so long as we avoid all appearance of that
affectation which Virgil has derided so cleverly This was a certain Cimber who killed his brother,
a fact which Cicero recorded in the words, The epigram against Sallust is scarcely less well
known It is a tiresome kind of affectation; any one can
practise it, and it is made all the worse by the fact
that the man who catches the infection will not
choose his words to suit his facts, but will drag in
irrelevant facts to provide an opportunity for the use
of such words. The coining of new words is, as I stated in the
first book, more permissible in Greek, for the
Greeks did not hesitate to coin nouns to represent
certain sounds and emotions, and in truth they were
taking no greater liberty than was taken by the
first men when they gave names to things. Our
own writers have ventured on a few attempts at
composition and derivation, but have not met with much success. I remember in my young days there
was a dispute between Pomponius and Seneca which
even found its way into the prefaces of their works,
as to whether gradus eliminate was a phrase which
ought to have been allowed in tragedy. But the
ancients had no hesitation about using even expectorate
and, after all, it presents exactly the same formation
as exanimat. Of the coining of words by expansion
and inflexion we have examples, such as the Ciceronian beatitas and beatitudo, forms which he feels to
be somewhat harsh, though he thinks they may be
softened by use. Derivatives may even be fashioned
from proper names, quite apart from ordinary words,
witness Sullaturit in Cicero and Fimbriatus and Figulatus in Asinius. Many new words have been
coined in imitation of the Greeks, more especially
by Verginius Flavus, some of which, such as queens and
essentia, are regarded as unduly harsh. But I see no
reason why we should treat them with such contempt,
except, perhaps, that we are highly self-critical and
suffer in consequence from the poverty of our
language. Some new formations do, however, succeed
in establishing themselves. For words which now
are old, once were new, and there are some words in
use which are of quite recent origin, such as reatus,
invented by Messala, and munerarius, invented by
Augustus. So, too, my own teachers still persisted
in banning the use of words, such as piratica, musica
and fabrica, while Cicero regards favor and urbanus
as but newly introduced into the language. For in
a letter to Brutus he says, eum amorer et eum, ut hoc verbo utar, favored in consilium advocabo, while to
Appius Pulcher he writes, le hominem non solum sapientem, verum etiam, ut nunc loquimur, urbanum. He
also thinks that Terence was the first to use the
word obsequium, while Caecilius asserts that Sisenna
was the first to use the phrase albente caelo. Hortensius seems to have been the first to use cervix in
the singular, since the ancients confined themselves
to the plural. We must not then be cowards, for I
cannot agree with Celsus when he forbids orators to
coin new words. For some words, as Cicero says,
are native, that is to say, are used in their original
meaning, while others are derivative, that is to say,
formed from the native. Granted then that we
are not justified in coining entirely new words
having no resemblance to the words invented by
primitive man, I must still ask at what date we were
first forbidden to form derivatives and to modify
and compound words, processes which were undoubtedly permitted to later generations of mankind.
If, however, one of our inventions seems a little
risky, we must take certain measures in advance to
save it from censure, prefacing it by phrases such as or The same practice may be followed in the
case of bold metaphors, and it is not too much to
say that almost anything can be said with safety
provided we show by the very fact of our anxiety
that the word or phrase in question is not due to an
error of judgment. The Greeks have a neat saying
on this subject, advising us to be the first to blame
our own hyperbole. The metaphorical use of words cannot be recommended except in connected discourse. Enough has
now been said on the subject of single words, which,
as I have pointed out elsewhere, have no intrinsic
value of their own. On the other hand, there is no
word which is intrinsically ugly unless it be beneath
the dignity of the subject on which we have to
speak, excepting always such words as are nakedly
obscene. I would commend this remark to those
who do not think it necessary to avoid obscenity on
the ground that no word is indecent in itself and
that, if a thing is revolting, its unpleasantness will
be realised clearly enough by whatever name it is
called. Accordingly, I shall content myself with
following the good old rules of Roman modesty and,
as I have already replied to such persons, shall
vindicate the cause of decency by saying no more on
this unpleasant subject. Let us now pass to consider connected discourse.
Its adornment may be effected, primarily, in two
ways; that is to say, we must consider first our ideal
of style, and secondly how we shall express this ideal
in actual words. The first essential is to realise
clearly what we wish to enhance or attenuate, to
express with vigour or calm, in luxuriant or austere
language, at length or with conciseness, with gentleness or asperity, magnificence or subtlety, gravity or
wit. The next essential is to decide by what kind of
metaphor, figures, reflexions, methods and arrangement we may best produce the effect which we
desire. But, before I discuss ornament, I must first touch
upon its opposite, since the first of all virtues is the
avoidance of faults. Therefore we must not expect
any speech to be ornate that is not, in the first place, acceptable. An acceptable style is defined by
Cicero as one which is not over-elegant not that
our style does not require elegance and polish,
which are essential parts of ornament, but that excess
is always a vice. He desires, therefore, that our
words should have a certain weight about them, and
that our thoughts should be of a serious cast or, at
any rate, adapted to the opinions and character of
mankind. These points once secured, we may
proceed to employ those expressions which he
regards as conferring distinction on style, that is to
say, specially selected words and phrases, metaphor,
hyperbole, appropriate epithets, repetitions, synonyms and all such language as may suit our case and
provide an adequate representation of the facts. But since my first task is to point out the faults to
be avoided, I will begin by calling attention to the
fault known as a term applied to the
employment of language to which perverted usage
has given an obscene meaning take, for example,
phrases such as ductare exercitus and patrare bellum,
which were employed by Sallust in their old and
irreproachable sense, but, I regret to say, cause
amusement in certain quarters to-day. This, however, is not, in my opinion, the fault of the writer, but
of his readers; still it is one to be avoided, for we
have perverted the purity of language by our own
corruption, and there is no course left to us but to
give ground before the victorious advance of vice.
The same term is also applied in the cases where an
unfortunate collocation of words produces an obscene
suggestion. For example, in the phrase cum hominibus notis loqui, unless hominibus is placed between cum
and notis, we shall commit ourselves to a phrase which will require some apology, since the final letter
of the first syllable, which cannot be pronounced
without closing the lips, will force us either to pause
in a most unbecoming manner, or by assimilation to
the n which follows will produce a most objectionable suggestion. I might quote other collocations
of words which are liable to the same objection, but
to discuss them in detail would be to fall into that
very fault which I have just said should be avoided.
A similar offence against modesty may be caused by
the division of words, as, for example, by the use of
the nominative of intercapedinis. And it is not
merely in writing that this may occur, but you will
find, unless you exercise the greatest care, that there
are a number of persons who take pleasure in putting
an indecent interpretation on words, thinking, as
Ovid says Nay, an obscene meaning may be extracted even
from words which are as far removed from indecency
as possible. Celsus, for example, detects an instance
of in the Virgilian phrase but if this point of view be accepted, it will be risky
to say anything at all. Next to indecency of expression comes meanness,
styled when the grandeur or dignity of
anything is diminished by the words used, as in the
line The opposite fault, which is no less serious, consists in calling small things by extravagant names, though
such a practice is permissible when deliberately
designed to raise a laugh. Consequently we must
not call a parricide a scamp, nor a man who keeps a
harlot a villain, since the first epithet is too weak
and the second too strong. This fault will result in
making our language dull, or coarse, jejune, heavy,
unpleasing or slovenly, all of which faults are best
realised by reference to the virtues which are their
opposites, that is, point, polish, richness, liveliness,
charm, and finish. We must also avoid a term applied to
meagreness and inadequacy of expression, although
it is a fault which characterises an obscure style rather
than one which lacks ornament. But meiosis may be
deliberately employed, and is then called a figure,
as also is tautology, which means the repetition of a
word or phrase. The latter, though not avoided
with special care even by the best authors, may
sometimes be regarded as a fault it is, in fact, a
blemish into which Cicero not infrequently falls
through indifference to such minor details take, for
example, the following passage, It is sometimes given another name, under
which appellation it is ranked among figures, of
which I shall give examples when I come to the
discussion of stylistic virtues. A worse fault is or sameness, a term
applied to a style which has no variety to relieve
its tedium, and which presents a uniform monotony
of hue. This is one of the surest signs of lack of art,
and produces a uniquely unpleasing effect, not merely
on the mind, but on the ear, on account of its sameness of thought, the uniformity of its figures, and
the monotony of its structure. We must also avoid
macrology, that is, the employment of more words
than are necessary, as, for instance, in the sentence
of Livy, On the other hand, periphrasis, which is akin to this
blemish, is regarded as a virtue. Another fault is
pleonasm, when we overload our style with a superfluity of words, as in the phrase, where would have been
sufficient. Cicero passed a witty comment on a
fault of this kind in a declamation of Hirtius when
he said that a child had been carried for ten months
in his mother's womb. he said, Sometimes, however, the form of pleonasm, of which I
have just given an example, may have a pleasing
effect when employed for the sake of emphasis, as
in the Virgilian phrase But whenever the addition is not deliberate, but
merely tame and redundant, it must be regarded as
a fault. There is also a fault entitled which
I may perhaps translate by superfluous elaboration,
which differs from its corresponding virtue much as
fussiness differs from industry, and superstition from
religion. Finally, every word which neither helps
the sense nor the style may be regarded as faulty. Cacozelia, or perverse affectation, is a fault in every
kind of style for it includes all that is turgid,
trivial, luscious, redundant, far-fetched or extravagant, while the same name is also applied to virtues carried to excess, when the mind loses its critical
sense and is misled by the false appearance of
beauty, the worst of all offences against style, since
other faults are due to carelessness, but this is
deliberate. This form of affectation, however, affects
style alone. For the employment of arguments which
might equally well be advanced by the other side,
or are foolish, inconsistent or superfluous, are all
faults of matter, whereas corruption of style is
revealed in the employment of improper or redundant
words, in obscurity of meaning, effeminacy of rhythm,
or in the childish search for similar or ambiguous
expressions. Further, it always involves insincerity,
even though all insincerity does not imply affectation.
For it consists in saying something in an unnatural
or unbecoming or superfluous manner. Style may,
however, be corrupted in precisely the same number
of ways that it may be adorned. But I have discussed this subject at greater length in another
work, and have frequently called attention to it in
this, while I shall have occasion to mention it continually in the remaining books. For in dealing with
ornament, I shall occasionally speak of faults which
have to be avoided, but which are hard to distinguish
from virtues. To these blemishes may be added faulty arrangement or the faulty use of figures or and the faulty collocation of words
or But, as I have already discussed
arrangement, I will confine myself to the consideration of figures and structure. There is also a fault
known as which consists in the indiscriminate use of several different dialects, as, for
instance, would result from mixing Doric, Ionic, and even Aeolic words with Attic. A similar fault is
found amongst ourselves, consisting in the indiscriminate mixture of grand words with mean, old
with new, and poetic with colloquial, the result
being a monstrous medley like that described by
Horace in the opening portion of his Ars poetica, and, be proceeds to say, should add other limbs from
different animals. The ornate is something that goes beyond what
is merely lucid and acceptable. It consists firstly
in forming a clear conception of what we wish to
say, secondly in giving this adequate expression,
and thirdly in lending it additional brilliance, a
process which may correctly be termed embellishment. Consequently we must place among ornaments
that which I mentioned in the rules which
I laid down for the statement of facts, because vivid
illustration, or, as some prefer to call it, representation, is something more than mere clearness, since
the latter merely lets itself be seen, whereas the
former thrusts itself upon our notice. It is a great
gift to be able to set forth the facts on which
we are speaking clearly and vividly. For oratory
fails of its full effect, and does not assert itself
as it should, if its appeal is merely to the hearing,
and if the judge merely feels that the facts
on which he has to give his decision are being
narrated to him, and not displayed in their living
truth to the eyes of the mind. But since different
views have been held with regard to this art of
representation, I shall not attempt to divide it into all its different departments, whose number is
ostentatiously multiplied by certain writers, but
shall content myself with touching on those which
appear to me to be absolutely necessary. There is,
then, to begin with, one form of vividness which consists in giving an actual word-picture of a scene, as
in the passage beginning, Other details follow which give us such a picture
of the two boxers confronting each other for the
fight, that it could not have been clearer had we
been actual spectators. Cicero is supreme in this
department, as in others. Is there anybody so incapable of forming a mental picture of a scene that,
when he reads the following passage from the
Verrines, he does not seem not merely to see the
actors in the scene, the place itself and their very
dress, but even to imagine to himself other details
that the orator does not describe For my own
part, I seem to see before my eyes his face, his eyes,
the unseemly blandishments of himself and his paramour, the silent loathing and frightened shame of
those who viewed the scene. At times, again, the
picture which we endeavour to present is fuller in
detail, as, for example, in the following description
of a luxurious banquet, which is also from Cicero,
since he by himself is capable of supplying admirable
examples of every kind of oratorical ornament What more
would any man have seen who had actually entered
the room So, too, we may move our hearers to
tears by the picture of a captured town. For the
mere statement that the town was stormed, while
no doubt it embraces all that such a calamity involves, has all the curtness of a dispatch, and fails
to penetrate to the emotions of the hearer. But if
we expand all that the one word includes,
we shall see the flames pouring from house and
temple, and hear the crash of falling roofs and one
confused clamour blent of many cries we shall
behold some in doubt whither to fly, others clinging
to their nearest and dearest in one last embrace,
while the wailing of women and children and the
laments of old men that the cruelty of fate should
have spared them to see that day will strike upon
our ears. Then will come the pillage of treasure
sacred and profane, the hurrying to and fro of the
plunderers as they carry off their booty or return to
seek for more, the prisoners driven each before his
own inhuman captor, the mother struggling to keep
her child, and the victors fighting over the richest
of the spoil. For though, as I have already said,
the sack of a city includes all these things, it is less
effective to tell the whole news at once than to
recount it detail by detail. And we shall secure
the vividness we seek, if only our descriptions give
the impression of truth, nay, we may even add
fictitious incidents of the type which commonly
occur. The same vivid impression may be produced also by the mention of the accidents of each
situation or Though the attainment of such effects is, in my
opinion, the highest of all oratorical gifts, it is far
from difficult of attainment. Fix your eyes on nature
and follow her. All eloquence is concerned with
the activities of life, while every man applies to
himself what he hears from others, and the mind
is always readiest to accept what it recognises to
be true to nature. The invention of similes has also provided an
admirable means of illuminating our descriptions.
Some of these are designed for insertion among
our arguments to help our proof, while others are
devised to make our pictures yet more vivid; it is
with this latter class of simile that I am now specially
concerned. The following are good examples or In employing this form of ornament we must be
especially careful that the subject chosen for our
simile is neither obscure nor unfamiliar for anything that is selected for the purpose of illuminating something else must itself be clearer than that which
it is designed to illustrate. Therefore while we may
permit poets to employ such similes as it would be quite unsuitable for an orator to illustrate
something quite plain by such obscure allusions.
But even the type of simile which I discussed in
connexion with arguments is an ornament to oratory,
and serves to make it sublime, rich, attractive or
striking, as the case may be. For the more remote
the simile is from the subject to which it is applied,
the greater will be the impression of novelty and the
unexpected which it produces. The following type
may be regarded as commonplace and useful only as
helping to create an impression of sincerity or Far finer is
the following from Cicero's defence of Archias and the rest. This type
of simile has, however, sadly degenerated in the
hands of some of our declaimers owing to the license
of the schools. For they adopt false comparisons,
and even then do not apply them as they should
to the subjects to which they wish them to provide
a parallel. Both these faults are exemplified in
two similes which were on the lips of everyone when I was a young man, and In every
comparison the simile either precedes or follows the
subject which it illustrates. But sometimes it is
free and detached, and sometimes, a far better
arrangement, is attached to the subject which it
illustrates, the correspondence between the resemblances being exact, an effect produced by reciprocal
representation, which the Greeks style For example, the simile already quoted, precedes its subject. On the other hand, an example
of the simile following its subject is to be found in
the first Georgic, where, after the long lamentation
over the wars civil and foreign that have afflicted
Rome, there come the lines There is, however, no antapodosis in these similes.
Such reciprocal representation places both subjects of
comparison before our very eyes, displaying them
side by side. Virgil provides many remarkable examples, but it will be better for me to quote from
oratory. In the pro Murena Cicero says, There is also another simile in the same
speech, which is almost worthy of a poet, but in
virtue of its reciprocal representation is better adapted
for ornament We find also
shorter similes, such as or the passage from Cicero's
speech against Clodius Similar
examples from everyday speech will occur to
everyone. Such comparisons reveal the gift not merely of
placing a thing vividly before the eye, but of doing
so with rapidity and without waste of detail. The
praise awarded to perfect brevity is well-deserved;
but, on the other hand, brachylogy, which I shall
deal with when I come to speak of figures, that is
to say, the brevity that says nothing more than what
is absolutely necessary, is less effective, although it
may be employed with admirable results when it
expresses a great deal in a very few words, as in
Sallust's description of Mithridates as But unsuccessful
attempts to imitate this form of terseness result
merely in obscurity. A virtue which closely resembles the last, but
is on a grander scale, is emphasis, which succeeds in revealing a deeper meaning than is actually
expressed by the words. There are two kinds of
emphasis the one means more than it says, the
other often means something which it does not
actually say. An example of the former is found
in Homer, where he makes Menelaus say that the
Greeks descended into the Wooden Horse, indicating
its size by a single verb. Or again, there is the
following example by Virgil a phrase which in a similar manner indicates the
height of the horse. The same poet, when he says
that the Cyclops lay stretched by taking the room occupied as the standard
of measure, gives an impression of the giant's
immense bulk. The second kind of emphasis consists either in the complete suppression of a word
or in the deliberate omission to utter it. As an
example of complete suppression I may quote the
following passage from the pro Ligario, 4 where
Cicero says Here he suppresses the fact, which is none the less clear enough
to us, that he does not lack counsellors who would
incite him to cruelty. The omission of a word is produced by aposiopesis, which, however, being a figure,
shall be dealt with in its proper place. Emphasis is
also found in the phrases of every day, such as or or So like, as a rule, is nature to art. It is not, however, sufficient for eloquence to set forth its theme in brilliant and vivid language
there are many different ways of embellishing our
style. For even that absolute and unaffected simplicity which the Greeks call has in it a
certain chaste ornateness such as we admire also in
women, while a minute accuracy in securing propriety and precision in our words likewise produces
an impression of neatness and delicacy. Again
copiousness may consist either in wealth of thought
or luxuriance of language. Force, too, may be
shown in different ways; for there will always be
force in anything that is in its own way effective.
Its most important exhibitions are to be found in
the following or a certain sublimity in the
exaggerated denunciation of unworthy conduct, to
mention no other topics; or imagination,
which assists us to form mental pictures of things; or finish, which produces completeness of
effect; an intensified form of the preceding, which reasserts our proofs and clinches the
argument by repetition; and or vigour, a
near relative of all these qualities, which derives
its name from action and finds its peculiar function
in securing that nothing that we say is tame.
Bitterness, which is generally employed in abuse,
may be of service as in the following passage.
from Cassius Pungency also may be employed,
as in the following remark of Crassus But the real power of
oratory lies in enhancing or attenuating the force of words. Each of these departments has the same
number of methods; I shall touch on the more important; those omitted will be of a like character,
while all are concerned either with words or things.
I have, however, already dealt with the methods of
invention and arrangement, and shall therefore now
concern myself with the way in which style may
elevate or depress the subject in hand. IV. The first method of amplification or attenuation
is to be found in the actual word employed to
describe a thing. For example, we may say that
a man who was beaten was murdered, or that a dishonest fellow is a robber, or, on the other hand, we
may say that one who struck another merely touched
him, and that one who wounded another merely hurt
him. The following passage from the pro Caelio,
provides examples of both For here he calls an immodest
woman a harlot, and says that one who had long
been her lover saluted her with a certain freedom.
This sort of amplification may be strengthened
and made more striking by pointing the comparison between words of stronger meaning and
those for which we propose to substitute them, as
Cicero does in denouncing Verres In this passage the
first epithets are bad enough, but are rendered
still worse by those which follow. I consider,
However, that there are four principal methods of
implication augmentation, comparison, reasoning and
accumulation. Of these, augmentation is most impressive when it
ends grandeur even to comparative insignificance.
This may be effected either by one step or by
everal, and may be carried not merely to the
highest degree, but sometimes even beyond it.
A single example from Cicero will suffice to
llustrate all these points. If he had
merely been scourged, we should have had but one
tep, indicated by the description even of the lesser
offence as a sin, while if he had merely been killed,
we should have had several more steps; but after
saying that it was and mentioning the worst of crimes, he adds, Consequently, since he had
ready exhausted his vocabulary of crime, words
must necessarily fail him to describe something still
orse. There is a second method of passing beond the highest degree, exemplified in Virgil's
description of Lausus or here the words give us the superlative, on which
the poet proceeds to superimpose a still higher
degree. There is also a third sort, which is not
attained by gradation, a height which is not a
degree beyond the superlative, but such that
nothing greater can be conceived. For to make a thing so great as
to be incapable of augmentation is in itself a kind
of augmentation. It is also possible to heighten
our style less obviously, but perhaps yet more effectively, by introducing a continuous and unbroken
series in which each word is stronger than the last,
as Cicero does when he describes how Antony
vomited Each phrase is more forcible than that
which went before. Vomiting is an ugly thing in
itself, even when there is no assembly to witness
it; it is ugly when there is such an assembly, even
though it be not an assembly of the people; ugly
even though it be an assembly of the people and
not the Roman people; ugly even though he were
engaged on no business at the time, even if his
business were not public business, even if lie were
not Master of the Horse. Another might have
broken up the series and lingered over each step
in the ascending scale, but Cicero hastens to his
climax and reaches the height not by laborious
effort, but by the impetus of his speed. Just as this form of amplification rises to a climax,
so, too, the form which depends on comparison seeks
to rise from the less to the greater, since by raising
what is below it must necessarily exalt that which is above, as, for example in the following passage Or take this
passage from the speech against Catiline At times, again, we may advance a parallel
to make something which we desire to exaggerate
seem greater than ever, as Cicero does in the pro
Cluentio, where, after telling a story of a woman
of Miletus who took a bribe from the reversionary
heirs to prevent the birth of her expected child,
lie cries, I would not, however,
have anyone think that this method is identical
with that used in argument, where the greater is
inferred from the less, although there is a certain
resemblance between the two. For in the latter
case we are aiming at proof, in the former at
amplification; for example, in the passage just cited
about Oppianicus, the object of the comparison is
not to show that his action was a crime, but that
it was even worse than another crime. There is,
however, a certain affinity between the two methods,
and I will therefore repeata passage which I
quoted there, although my present purpose is
different. For what I have now to demonstrate is
that when amplification is our purpose we compare not merely whole with whole, but part with
part, as in the following passage Here
Catiline is compared to Gracchus, the constitution
of the state to the whole world, a slight change for
the worse to fire and sword and desolation, and a
private citizen to the consuls, all comparisons
affording ample opportunity for further individual
expansion, if anyone should desire so to do. With regard to the amplificalion produced by
reasoning, we must consider whether reasoning quite
expresses my meaning. I am not a stickler for
exact terminology, provided the sense is clear to
any serious student. My motive in using this term
was, however, this, that this form of amplification
produces its effect at a point other than that where
it is actually introduced. One thing is magnified
in order to effect a corresponding augmentation elsewhere, and it is by reasoning that our hearers are
then led on from the first point to the second which
we desire to emplasise. Cicero, when he is about
to reproach Antony with his drunkenness and
vomiting, says, etc. What have his throat
and flanks to do with his drunkenness The
reference is far from pointless for by looking at
them we are enabled to estimate the quantity of the wine which he drank at Hippias' wedding, and
was unable to carry or digest in spite of the fact
that his bodily strength was worthy of a prizefighter. Accordingly if, in such a case, one thing is
inferred from another, the term reasoning is neither
improper nor extraordinary, since it has been
applied on similar grounds to one of the bases.
So, again, amplification results from subsequent
events, since the violence with which the wine
burst from him was such that the vomiting was
not accidental nor voluntary, but a matter of
necessity, at a moment when it was specially unseemly, while the food was not recently swallowed,
as is sometimes the case, but the residue of the revel
of the preceding day. On the other hand, amplification may equally result from antecedent circumstances; for example, when Juno made her request
to Aeolus, the latter whereby the poet shows what a mighty tempest will
ensue. Again, when we have depicted some horrible
circumstance in such colours as to raise the detestation of our audience to its height, we then proceed
to make light of them in order that what is to follow
may seem still more horrible consider the following
passage from Cicero Does not the orator employ a process of reasoning to
enable the audience to infer how great the implied
crime must be when such actions were but humane
and ordinary in comparison So, again, one thing
may be magnified by allusion to another the valour
of Scipio is magnified by extolling the fame of
Hannibal as a general, and we are asked to marvel
at the courage of the Germans and the Gauls in
order to enhance the glory of Gaius Caesar. There
is a similar form of amplification which is effected by
reference to something which appears to have been
said with quite another purpose in view. The chiefs
of Troy think it no discredit that Trojan and Greek
should endure so many woes for so many years all
for the sake of Helen's beauty. How wondrous,
then, must her beauty have been For it is not
Paris, her ravisher, that says this; it is not some
youth or one of the common herd; no, it is the
elders, the wisest of their folk, the counsellors of
Priam. Nay, even the king himself, worn out by a
ten years' war, which had cost him the loss of so many
of his sons, and threatened to lay his kingdom in the
dust, the man who, above all, should have loathed
and detested her beauty, the source of all those
tears, hears these words, calls her his daughter, and
places her by his side, excuses her guilt, and denies
that she is the cause of his sorrows. Again, when
Plato in the Symposium makes Alcibiades confess
how he had wished Socrates to treat him, he does
not, I think, record these facts with a view to
blaming Aleibiades, but rather to show the unconquerable self-control of Socrates, which would
not yield even to the charms which the greatest
beauty of his day so frankly placed at his disposal. We are even given the means of realising the
extraordinary stature of the heroes of old by the
description of their weapons, such as the shield of
Ajax and the spear-shaft of Achilles hewn in the
forests of Pelion. Virgil also has made admirable
use of this device in his description of the Cyclops.
For what an image it gives us of the bulk of that
body So, too, what a giant must Demoleos have been,
Whose And yet the hero buckled it upon him and And again, Cicero could hardly even have conceived of such luxury in Antony himself as he
describes when he says, Slaves
are using purple coverlets in their chambers, aye,
and coverlets that had once been Pompey's No
more, surely, can be said than this, and yet it leaves
us to infer how infinitely greater was the luxury of
their master. This form of amplification is near akin
to emphasis but emphasis derives its effect from
the actual words, while in this case the effect is
produced by inference from the facts, and is consequently far more impressive, inasmuch as facts are
more impressive than words. Accumulation of words and sentences identical in
meaning may also be regarded under the head of
amplification. For although the climax is not in
this case reached by a series of steps, it is none the
less attained by the piling up of words. Take the
following example This passage recalls the figure
styled by the Greeks, but in that
figure it is a number of different things that are
accumulated, whereas in this passage all the accumulated details have but one reference. The
heightening of effect may also be produced by
making the words rise to a climax. Attenuation is effected by the same method, since
there are as many degrees of descent as ascent.
I shall therefore content myself with quoting but
one example, namely, the words used by Cicero to
describe the speech of Rullus This passage may be regarded as providing an example of
attenuation or of augmentation, according as we consider its literal meaning or fix our attention on the
obscurity attributed to Rullus. I know that some may perhaps regard hyperbole
as a species of amplification, since hyperbole can be employed to create an effect in either direction.
But as the name is also applied to one of the tropes,
I must postpone its consideration for the present.
I would proceed to the immediate discussion of this
subject but for the fact that others have given
separate treatment to this form of artifice, which
employs words not in their literal, but in a metaphorical sense. I shall therefore at this point
indulge a desire now almost universal, and discuss
a form of ornament which many regard as the chief,
nay, almost the sole adornment of oratory. V. When the ancients used the word sententia,
they meant a feeling, or opinion. The word is
frequently used in this sense by orators, and traces
of this meaning are still found even in the speech
of every day. For when we are going to take an
oath we use the phrase ex animi nostri sententia in
accordance with what we hold is the solemn truth,
and when we offer congratulations, we say that we do
so ex sententia with all our heart. The ancients, indeed, often expressed the same meaning by saying
that they uttered their sensa; for they regarded
senses as referring merely to the senses of the body.
But modern usage applies sensus to concepts of the
mind, while sentcntia is applied to striking reflexions
such as are more especially introduced at the close
of our periods, a practice rare in earlier days, but
carried even to excess in our own. Accordingly, I
think that I ought to say something of the various
forms which such reflexions may tale and the manner
in which they should be used. Although all the different forms are included
under the same name, the oldest type of sententia,
and that in which the term is most correctly applied, is the aphorism, called by the Greeks. Both
the Greek and the Latin names are derived from
the fact that such utterances resemble the decrees
or resolutions of public bodies. The term, however,
is of wide application indeed, such reflexions may
be deserving of praise even when they have no
reference to any special context, and is used in
various ways. Sometimes it refers merely to things,
as in the sentence Occasionally, again, they may have a
personal reference, as in the following utterance
of Domitius Afer Some have called
this form of reflexion a part of the enthymeme, others
the major premise or conclusion of the epichireme, as
it sometimes, though not invariably, is. More correct
is the statement that at times it is simple, as in the
example just quoted, while at other times a reason
for the statement may be added, such as the following Sometimes, again, it may be double, as in
the statement that There are some even who classify them under ten
heads, though the principle on which they make
this division is such that it would justify a still
larger number they class them as based on interrogation, comparison, denial, similarity, admiration,
and the like, for they can be treated under every kind of figure. A striking type is that which is
produced by opposition Others are cast in a form of a direct statement,
such as But they acquire greater force by a change in the
figure employed, as in the following For this is more vigorous than the simple statement, A similar effect may be produced by transference of' the statement from the
general to the particular. For example, although
the direct statement would be, Ovid gives this reflexion
increased force when lie makes Medea say, Cicero again gives the general statement a personal
turn when he says For
here he attributes to Caesar what was really attributable to the circumstances of his power. In
this class of reflexion we must be careful, as always,
not to employ them too frequently, nor at random,
nor place them in the mouth of every kind of person, while we must make certain that they are not
untrue, as is so often the case with those speakers
who style them reflexions of universal application and
recklessly employ whatever seems to support their
case as though its truth were beyond question.
Such reflexions are best suited to those speakers
whose authority is such that their character itself
will lend weight to their words. For who would
tolerate a boy, or a youth, or even a man of low
birth who presumed to speak with all the authority
of a judge and to thrust his precepts down our throats The term enthymeme may be applied to any concept
of the mind, but in its strict sense means a reflexion
drawn from contraries. Consequently, it has a
supremacy among reflexions which we may compare to that of Homer among poets and Rome
among cities. I have already said enough on this
topic in dealing with arguments. But the use of
the enthymeme is not confined to proof, it may sometimes be employed for the purpose of ornament, as
in the following instance Cicero's
motive in saying this is not that it introduces any
fresh reason for clemency, but because he has already
demonstrated by other arguments how unjust such
conduct would be, while he adds it at the period's
close as an epiphonema, not by way of proof, but as
a crowning insult to his opponents. For an epiphonema
is an exclamation attached to the close of a statement
or a proof by way of climax. Here are two examples and There
is also what our modern rhetoricians call the noema,
a term which may be taken to mean every kind of
conception, but is employed by them in the special
sense of things which they wish to be understood,
though they are not actually said, as in the declamation where the sister defends herself against the
brother whom she had often bought out from the
gladiatorial school, when he brought an action
against her demanding the infliction of a similar
mutilation because she had cut off his thumb while
he slept she cries, meaning thereby, There is also what
is called a clausula. If this merely means a conclusion, it is a perfectly correct and sometimes a
necessary device, as in the following case But to-day
something more is meant, for our rhetoricians want
every passage, every sentence to strike the ear by
an impressive close. In fact, they think it a disgrace, nay, almost a crime, to pause to breathe
except at the end of a passage that is designed to
call forth applause. The result is a number of tiny
epigrams, affected, irrelevant and disjointed. For
there are not enough striking reflexions in the world
to provide a close to every period. The following forms of reflexion are even more
modern. There is the type which depends on surprise for its effect, as, for example, when Vibius
Crispus, in denouncing the man who wore a breastplate when strolling in the forum and alleged that
he did so because he feared for his life, cried, Another
instance is the striking remark made by Africanus
to Nero with reference to the death of Agrippina Others are of
an allusive type for example, Domitius Afer, in his
defence of Cloatilla, whom Claudius had pardoned
when she was accused of having buried her husband,
who had been one of the rebels, addressed her sons
in his peroration with the words Some, again, depend on the fact that they are
transferred from one context to another Crispus,
in his defence of Spatale, whose lover had made her
his heir and then proceeded to die at the age
of eighteen, remarked Another type of reflexion may be produced by the doubling of a phrase,
as in the letter written by Seneca for Nero to be sent
to the senate on the occasion of his mother's death,
with a view to creating the impression that he had
been in serious danger Better, however, is the
type which relies for its effect on contrast of opposites,
as or, But to produce the most striking effect
this type should be given point by the introduction
of a comparison, such as is made by Trachalus in his
speech against Spatale, where he says In these instances, however, the reflexion may
equally well be good or bad. On the other hand,
there are some which will always be bad, such as
those which turn on play upon words, as in the
following case Worse still, as being more unreal
and far-fetched, is the remark made by the gladiator
mentioned above in his prosecution of his sister There is
another similar type, which is perhaps the worst of
all, where the play upon words is combined with a
false comparison. When I was a young man I heard
a distinguished pleader, after handing a mother some
splinters of bone taken from the head of her son
which he did merely to provide an occasion for his
epigram, cry Moreover, most of our orators delight in
devices of the pettiest kind, which seriously considered are merely ludicrous, but at the moment of
their production flatter their authors by a superficial
semblance of wit. Take, for instance, the exclamation
from the scholastic theme, where a man, after being
ruined by the barrenness of his land, is shipwrecked and hangs himself A
similar absurdity is to be found in the declamation,
to which I have already referred, in which a father
poisons his son who insists on tearing his flesh with
his teeth Or again, take this passage from the
theme of the luxurious man who is alleged to have
pretended to starve himself to death Others are merely
fatuous, such as the remark of the declaimer who
urges the courtiers of Alexander to provide him with
a tomb by burning down Babylon. As if this were the climax of
indignities Others fail from sheer extravagance.
For example, I once heard a rhetorician who was
declaiming about the Germans, say and again when
belauding a hero, However, I shall never
come to an end if I try to describe every possible
form of this kind of absurdity. I will therefore turn
to discuss a point of more importance. Rhetoricians are divided in opinion on this subject
some devote practically all their efforts to the
elaboration of reflexions, while others condemn their
employment altogether. I cannot agree entirely
with either view. If they are crowded too thick
together, such reflexions merely stand in each other's
way, just as in the case of crops and the fruits of
trees lack of room to grow results in a stunted
development. Again in pictures a definite outline
is required to throw objects into relief, and consequently artists who include a number of objects in
the same design separate them by intervals sufficient
to prevent one casting a shadow on the other.
Further, this form of display breaks up our speeches
into a number of detached sentences; every reflexion
is isolated, and consequently a fresh start is necessary
after each. This produces a discontinuous style, since our language is composed not of a system of limbs,
but of a series of fragments for your nicely rounded
and polished phrases are incapable of cohesion.
Further, the colour, though bright enough, has no
unity, but consists of a number of variegated splashes.
A purple stripe appropriately applied lends brilliance
to a dress, but a dress decorated with a quantity of
patches can never be becoming to anybody. Wherefore, although these ornaments may seem to stand
out with a certain glitter of their own, they are
rather to be compared to sparks flashing through
the smoke than to the actual brilliance of flame
they are, in fact, invisible when the language is of
uniform splendour, just as the stars are invisible in
the light of day. And where eloquence seeks to
secure elevation by frequent small efforts, it merely
produces an uneven and broken surface which fails
to win the admiration due to outstanding objects
and lacks the charm that may be found in a smooth
surface. To this must be added the fact that those
who devote themselves solely to the production of
reflexions cannot avoid giving utterance to many that
are trivial, flat or foolish. For their mere number
will so embarrass their author that selection will be
impossible. Consequently you will often find that
such persons will produce a division or an argument as
if it were an epigram, the only qualification necessary
being that it should come toward the close of the
period and be impressively delivered. Here we have a division. This is an argument. There are, moreover, a number of speakers
who not merely deliver many such epigrams, but
utter everything as if it were an epigram. Against
these persons, on the other hand, must be set those
who shun and dread all ornament of this kind, approving nothing that is not plain, humble and effortless,
with the result that by their reluctance to climb for
fear of falling they succeed merely in maintaining a
perpetual flatness. What sin is there in a good
epigram Does it not help our case, or move the
judge, or commend the speaker to his audience
It may be urged, perhaps, that it is a form of
ornament eschewed by the ancients. What do you
mean by antiquity If you go back to the earliest
periods you will find that Demosthenes frequently
employed methods that were known to none before
him. How can we give our approval to Cicero, if we
think that no change should be made from the
methods of Cato and the Gracchi And yet before
the Gracchi and Cato the style of oratory was simpler
still. For my own part I regard these particular
ornaments of oratory to be, as it were, the eyes of
eloquence. On the other hand, I should not like to
see the whole body full of eyes, for fear that it might
cripple the functions of the other members, and, if I
had no alternative, I should prefer the rudeness of
ancient eloquence to the license of the moderns.
But a middle course is open to us here no less than
in the refinements of dress and mode of life, where
there is a certain tasteful elegance that offends no
one. Therefore let us as far as possible seek to increase the number of our virtues, although our first
care must always be to keep ourselves free from
vices, lest in seeking to make ourselves better than the ancients we succeed merely in making ourselves
unlike them. I will now proceed to the next subject for discussion, which is, as I have said, that of tropes, or modes,
as the most distinguished Roman rhetoricians call
them. Rules for their use are given by the teachers
of literature as well. But I postponed the discussion
of the subject when I was dealing with literary
education, because it seemed to me that the theme
would have greater importance if handled in connexion with the ornaments of oratory, and that it
ought to be reserved for treatment on a larger scale. 