Some arts, however, are based on examination, that is to say on the knowledge and proper
appreciation of things, as for instance astronomy, which demands no action, but is content to understand
the subject of its study such arts are called theoretical.
Others again are concerned with action this is their
end, which is realised in action, so that, the action
once performed, nothing more remains to do these
arts we style practical, and dancing will provide us
with an example. Thirdly there are others which
consist in producing a certain result and achieve their
purpose in the completion of a visible task such we
style productive, and painting may be quoted as an
illustration. In view of these facts we must come to
the conclusion that, in the main, rhetoric is concerned
with action; for in action it accomplishes that which
it is its duty to do. This view is universally accepted,
although in my opinion rhetoric draws largely on the
two other kinds of art. For it may on occasion be
content with the mere examination of a thing.
Rhetoric is still in the orator's possession even though
he be silent, while if he gives up pleading either
designedly or owing to circumstances over which he
has no control, he does not therefore cease to be an
orator, any more than a doctor ceases to be a doctor
when he withdraws from practice. Perhaps the
highest of all pleasures is that which we derive from
private study, and the only circumstances under
which the delights of literature are unalloyed are
when it withdraws from action, that is to say from
toil, and can enjoy the pleasure of self-contemplation. But in the results that the orator obtains by writing
speeches or historical narratives, which we may reasonably count as part of the task of oratory, we shall
recognise features resembling those of a productive
art. Still, if rhetoric is to be regarded as one of these
three classes of art, since it is with action that its practice is chiefly and most frequently concerned, let
us call it an active or administrative art, the two
terms being identical. 