The third kind of proof, which is drawn into
the service of the case from without, is styled a by the Greeks, who apply the term to all
comparisons of like with like, but more especially
to historical parallels. Roman writers have for the
most part preferred to give the name of comparison
to that which the Greeks style while they
translate by example, although this
latter involves comparison, while the former is of the nature of an example. For my own part, I
prefer with a view to making my purpose easier of
apprehension to regard both as and to
call them examples. Nor am I afraid of being
thought to disagree with Cicero, although he does
separate comparison from example. For he divides
all arguments into two classes, induction and
ratiocination, just as most Greeks divide it into and explaining as a rhetorical induction. The method of argument
chiefly used by Socrates was of this nature when
he had asked a number of questions to which his
adversary could only agree, he finally inferred the
conclusion of the problem under discussion from its
resemblance to the points already conceded. This
method is known as induction, and though it
cannot be used in a set speech, it is usual in a
speech to assume that which takes the form of a
question in dialogue. For instance take the following question This will be admitted. Several more questions
of the same kind follow. Last comes the question
for the sake of which all the others were put The answer can only be in the affirmative.
Such a procedure is most valuable in the examination of witnesses, but is differently employed in a set
speech. For there the orator either answers his
own questions or makes an assumption of that which
in dialogue takes the form of a question. All arguments of this kind, therefore, must be
from things like or unlike or contrary. Similes are,
it is true, sometimes employed for the embellishment of the speech as well, but I will deal with
them in their proper place; at present I am concerned with the use of similitude in proof. The most
important of proofs of this class is that which is most
properly styled example, that is to say the adducing
of some past action real or assumed which may
serve to persuade the audience of the truth of the
point which we are trying to make. We must
therefore consider whether the parallel is complete
or only partial, that we may know whether to use it
in its entirety or merely to select those portions
which are serviceable. We argue from the like
when we say, ; from the unlike when we say,
; from the contrary when we say, The same divisions apply also to
such forms of proof in panegyric or denunciation.
It will also be found useful when we are speaking of
what is likely to happen to refer to historical parallels
for instance if the orator asserts that Dionysius is
asking for a bodyguard that with their armed assistance he may establish himself as tyrant, he may adduce the parallel case of Pisistratus who secured
the supreme power by similar means. But while examples may at times, as in the last
instance, apply in their entirety, at times we shall
argue from the greater to the less or from the less
to the greater. Arguments from unlikes are most useful in exhortation. Courage is more remarkable in a woman
than in a man. Therefore, if we wish to kindle
someone's ambition to the performance of heroic
deeds, we shall find that parallels drawn from
the cases of Horatius and Torquatus will carry
less weight than that of the woman by whose
hand Pyrrhus was slain, and if we wish to urge
a man to meet death, the cases of Cato and
Scipio will carry less weight than that of
Lucretia. These are however arguments from the
greater to the less. Let me then give you separate
examples of these classes of argument from the
pages of Cicero; for where should I find better
The following passage from the pro Murena is an
instance of argument from the like The pro Milone will give us an
example of argument from the greater to the less The following is an
example of argument from the less to the greater and so
on till we come to, ;
then follows the whole invective against Clodius. Arguments from unlikes present great variety, for
they may turn on kind, manner, time, place, etcetera,
almost every one of which Cicero employs to overthrow the previous decisions that seemed to apply
to the case of Cluentius, while he makes use of
argument from contraries when lie minimises the
importance of the censorial stigma by praising Scipio
Africanus, who in his capacity of censor allowed one
whom he openly asserted to have committed deliberate perjury to retain his horse, because no one
had appeared as evidence against him, though he promised to come forward himself to bear witness to
his guilt, if any should be found to accuse him. I
have paraphrased this passage because it is too long
to quote. A brief example of a similar argument is
to be found in Virgil, Historical parallels may however sometimes be related in full, as in the pro Milone On the other hand in certain
cases it will be sufficient merely to allude to the
parallel, as Cicero does in the same speech Such parallels
will be adduced at greater or less length according
as they are familiar or as the interests or adornment
of our case may demand. A similar method is to be pursued in quoting from
the fictions of the poets, though we must remember
that they will be of less force as proofs. The same
supreme authority, the great master of eloquence,
shows us how we should employ such quotations. For
an example of this type will be found in the same
speech Again those fables
which, although they did not originate with Aesop
for Hesiod seems to have been the first to write
them, are best known by Aesop's name, are specially
attractive to rude and uneducated minds, which are
less suspicious than others in their reception of
fictions and, when pleased, readily agree with the
arguments from which their pleasure is derived.
Thus Menenius Agrippa is said to have reconciled
the plebs to the patricians by his fable of the limbs'
quarrel with the belly. Horace also did not regard
the employment of fables as beneath the dignity
even of poetry; witness his lines that narrate The Greeks call such fables tales and, as I
have already remarked, Aesopean or Libyan stories,
while some Roman writers term them though the name has not found general acceptance.
Similar to these is that class of proverb which may
be regarded as an abridged fable and is understood
allegorically he said, Simile has a force not unlike that of example, more
especially when drawn from things nearly equal
without any admixture of metaphor, as in the following case For which Cicero translates
by is often apt to compare things whose
resemblance is far less obvious. Nor does it merely
compare the actions of men as Cicero does in the
pro Murena  On the contrary, similes of
this kind are sometimes drawn from dumb animals
and inanimate objects. Further, since similar objects
often take on a different appearance when viewed
from a different angle, I feel that I ought to point
out that the kind of comparison which the Greeks
call and which expresses the appearance of
things and persons as for instance in the line of
Cassius should be more sparingly used in oratory than those
comparisons which help to prove our point. For
instance, if you wish to argue that the mind requires
cultivation, you would use a comparison drawn from
the soil, which if neglected produces thorns and
thickets, but if cultivated will bear fruit; or if you are exhorting someone to enter the service of the
state, you will point out that bees and ants, though
not merely dumb animals, but tiny insects, still toil
for the common weal. Of this kind is the saying
of Cicero And just as he draws
this simile in the pro Cluentio from the analogy of
the human body, so in the pro Cornelio he draws
a simile from horses, and in the pro Archia from
stones. As I have already said, the following type
of simile comes more readily to hand Still it is always possible
to be misled by appearances in the use of simile,
and we must therefore use our judgment in their
employment. For though a new ship is more useful
than one which is old, this simile will not apply to
friendship and again, though we praise one who is
liberal with her money, we do not praise one who
is liberal with her embraces. In these cases there is
similitude in the epithets old and liberal, but their
force is different, when applied to ships and friendship, money and embraces. Consequently, it is allimportant in this connexion to consider whether the
simile is really applicable. So in answering those
Socratic questions which I mentioned above, the
greatest care must be taken to avoid giving an incautious answer, such as those given by the wife of
Xenophon to Aspasia in the dialogue of Aeschines
the Socratic the passage is translated by Cicero as
follows she replied. she replied. said she, At this the wife of
Xenophon not unnaturally blushed; for she had
answered ill in replying that she would prefer her
neighbour's gold ornaments to her own, since it
would be wrong to do so. If on the other hand she
had replied that she would prefer her ornaments to
be of the same quality as those of her neighbour, she
might have answered without putting herself to the
blush that she would prefer her husband to be like
him who was his superior in virtue. I am aware that some writers have shown pedantic
zeal in making a minute classification of similes, and
have pointed out that there is lesser similitude such
as that of a monkey to a man or a statue when first
blocked out to its original, a greater similitude for
which compare the proverb , a similitude in things dissimilar an elephant,
for instance, and an ant both belong to the genus
animal,and dissimilitude in things similar puppies
and kids, for example, are unlike the parents, for
they differ from them in point of age. So too they
distinguish between contraries some are opposites,
as night to day, some hurtful, as cold water to a
fever, some contradictory, as truth to falsehood, and
some negative, as things which are not hard when
contrasted with things which are hard. But I
cannot see that such distinctions have any real
bearing on the subject under discussion. It is more important for our purpose to note that
arguments may be drawn from similar, opposite, and
dissimilar points of law. As an example of the first,
take the following passage from the Topica of
Cicero, where he argues that a man to whom the
usufruct of a house has been left will not restore it
in the interests of the heir if it collapses; just as
lie would not replace a slave if he should die. The
following will provide an example of an argument
drawn from opposite points of law An instance of an argument drawn from
dissimilar points of law occurs in the pro Caecina of
Cicero Dissimilar points may be illustrated by the following
example Some draw a distinction between analogy and
similarly, but personally I regard the former as
included under the latter. For the statement that
the relation of 1 to 10 is the same as that of 10 to
certainly involves similarity, just as does the
statement that a bad citizen may be compared to an
actual enemy. But arguments of this kind are
carried still further But these arguments
may readily be met by arguments from dissimilars Or
they may even be met by arguments from opposites;
as for instance, Authority also may be drawn from external sources
to support a case. Those who follow the Greeks,
who call such arguments style them judgments or adjudications, thereby referring not to
matters on which judicial sentence has been pronounced for such decisions form examples or precedents, but to whatever may be regarded as
expressing the opinion of nations, peoples, philosophers, distinguished citizens, or illustrious poets.
Nay, even common sayings and popular beliefs may
be found to be useful. For they form a sort of
testimony, which is rendered all the more impressive
by the fact that it was not given to suit special cases,
but was the utterance or action of minds swayed
neither by prejudice or influence, simply because it
seemed the most honourable or honest thing to say
or do. For instance, if I am speaking of the misfortunes of this mortal life, surely it will help me to
adduce the opinion of those nations who hold that
we should weep over the new-born child and rejoice over the dead. Or if I am urging the judge to shew
pity, surely my argument may be assisted by the
fact that Athens, the wisest of all states, regarded
pity not merely as an emotion, but even as a god.
Again, do we not regard the precepts of the Seven
Wise Men as so many rules of life If an adulteress is on her trial for poisoning, is she not already
to be regarded as condemned by the judgment of
Marcus Cato, who asserted that every adulteress
was as good as a poisoner As for reflexions drawn
from the poets, not only speeches, but even the
works of the philosophers, are full of them; for
although the philosophers think everything inferior to their own precepts and writings, they
have not thought it beneath their dignity to
quote numbers of lines from the poets to lend
authority to their statements.
Again, a remarkable example of the weight carried by authority
is provided by the fact that when the Megarians
disputed the possession of Salamis with the Athenians, the latter prevailed by citing a line from
Homer, which is not however found in all editions,
to the effect that Ajax united his ships with those of
the Athenians. Generally received sayings also become common property owing to the very fact that
they are anonymous, as, for instance, or or, to quote Cicero, Sayings such as these would not have acquired immortality had they not carried conviction of their
truth to all mankind. Some include under this head
the supernatural authority that is derived from
oracles, as for instance the response asserting that
Socrates was the wisest of mankind indeed, they rank it above all other authorities. Such authority
is rare, but may prove useful. It is employed by
Cicero in his speech on the Replies of the Soothsayers and in the oration in which he denounced
Catiline to the people, when he points to the statue
of Jupiter crowning a column, and again in the
pro Ligario, where lie admits the cause of Caesar to
be the better because the gods have decided in his
favour. When such arguments are inherent in the
case itself they are called supernatural evidence;
when they are adduced from without they are styled
supernatural arguments. Sometimes, again, it may
be possible to produce some saying or action of the
judge, of our adversary or his advocate in order to
prove our point. There have therefore been some
writers who have regarded examples and the use of
authorities of which I am speaking as belonging to
inartificial proofs, on the ground that the orator
does not discover them, but receives them readymade. But the point is of great importance. For
witnesses and investigation and the like all make
some pronouncement on the actual matter under
trial, whereas arguments drawn from without are in
themselves useless, unless the pleader has the wit to
apply them in such a manner as to support the
points which he is trying to make. 