Tile term enthymeme is applied not merely to
the actual argument, that is to say, the matter adduced to prove something else, but also to its expression, the nature of which, as I have already pointed
out, is twofold. It may be drawn from denial of
consequents, when it will consist of a proposition
immediately followed by a proof, as in the following
passage from the pro Ligario; Here we have a proposition and a
reason, but no formal conclusion it is therefore tile
incomplete syllogism known as an enthymeme. It may
on the other hand be drawn from incompatibles, in
which case the proof will be much stronger; indeed
some restrict the title of enthymeme to this form of
argument. The following passage from the pro
Milone of Cicero will provide a parallel This form
of argument may even at times consist of a number
of clauses, as in the following passage from the same
speech The
most effective kind of enthymeme seems however to
be that in which a reason is subjoined to a dissimilar
or contrary proposition as in the following passage
from Demosthenes As regards the epicheieme, some authorities hold
that it consists of four, five, and even six parts.
Cicero urges that there are not more than five at
most, i.e. the major premise and its reason, the minor
premise and its proof, and fifthly the conclusion.
But since at times the major premise does not
require a reason nor the minor a proof, while
occasionally even the conclusion is not necessary,
he holds that the epicheireme may consist of only
four, three, or even two parts. Personally however
follow the majority of authorities in holding that
there are not more than three parts. For it follows
from the very nature of reasoning that there must
be something to form the subject of enquiry and
something else to provide the proof, while the third
element which has to be added may be regarded
as resulting from the agreement of the two previous elements. Thus the first part will be the major, the
second the minor premise and the third the conclusion. For the confirmation and development of
both premises may reasonably be included in the
parts to which they belong. Let us then take
an example from Cicero of the epicheireme consisting
of five parts. This they call the first part and consider that
it requires to be established by various reasons and
a copious display of eloquence. Personally I hold
that the whole of this together with its reason forms
but one part. Otherwise, if the reason is to be treated
as a separate part and if there are a variety of
reasons, this will involve an addition to the number
of parts. Next he produces the minor premise The proof of this minor premise is
treated as the fourth part of the epicheireme. My
criticism of this statement is identical with my
criticism of the preceding. The fifth place they
assign to the conclusion which either merely makes
the necessary inference from the preceding parts
i.e. 
or after briefly bringing major and minor premise
together adds what is deduced from them with the
following result As regards this part of the epicheireme I agree. I have said that the epicheireme consists of three
parts its form is not however invariable. There is firstly the form in which the conclusion is identical
with what has already been stated in the major
premise. This process occurs not merely
in individual arguments, but in whole cases, provided
they are of a simple character, and also in questions.
For cases and questions always have first a major
premise, such as or Second comes a reason, which is
stated at greater length in cases and questions than
in separate arguments, while finally comes the conclusion in which as a rule they set forth the point
they have proved either by enumeration of particulars or in the form of a hasty conclusion. In this
type of epicheireme the major premise is doubtful, since
it is still under investigation. There is another
form of conclusion which is not actually identical
with the major premise, but has the same force There
is a third form in which the major premise and the
conclusion are different. It may be thought that in this case there is
no real major premise, since it would be possible
to state the reasoning in the following form etcetera. This major premise is either
an admitted fact as in the last example or requires to be proved as in the following  for
this is not an acknowledged truth, and the premises
must be established before we can arrive at the
conclusion. Sometimes again the minor premise is
an admitted fact, as for instance, while sometimes it requires to
be proved, as for example the statement quoted
above, since it is doubtful whether the
soul is immortal after its release from the body or
only continues to exist for a time. Some call this a
minor premise, some a reason. There is no difference between the epicheireme and
the syllogism, except that the latter has a number
of forms and infers truth from truth, whereas the
epicheireme is frequently concerned with statements
that are no more than credible. For if it were
always possible to prove controversial points from
admitted premises, the orator would have little to
do in this connexion. For what skill does it require
to say, or  But when
the reason given is itself disputable, we must
establish the certainty of the premises by which we
are proposing to prove what is uncertain. For
example, if our opponent says or or ; or, again, or or or we must prove the validity of the reason on which we base our claim that the
property should be adjudicated to us. But when
a reason of unusual length intervenes, it is necessary to state the final conclusion, otherwise the
major premise and the reason would suffice. Hence it
has been asserted that the form of enthymeme which is
based on denial of consequents resembles a reason. But
sometimes, again, it is sufficient to state a single
proposition as in the example just quoted, We may also begin
with the reason and then proceed to the conclusion
as in another passage from the same speech 'The process is still further varied by Cicero, and the
reason placed third, as in the phrase, On the other hand, he
places the various parts in the regular order in the
following instance Next comes
the reason Last comes the conclusion resulting
from the major premise and the reason This form of proof may be countered in three
ways, that is to say it may be attacked in all its
parts. For either the major premise or the minor or
the conclusion or occasionally all three are refuted.
The major premise is refuted in the following case For the very first question in the defence
of Milo is The minor premise is refuted by all the
methods which we mentioned in dealing with refutation. As to the reason it must be pointed out that it
is sometimes true when the proposition to which it
is attached is not true, but may on the other hand
sometimes be false although the proposition is true.
For example, is true, but
if the reason, be
added, we shall have an instance of a true major
premise and a false reason. With regard to the
conclusion, we may either deny its truth when it
infers something which does not logically result
from the premises, or we may treat it as irrelevant.
The truth is denied in the following case The conclusion is not
valid, since we have not yet proved that Clodius lay
in wait for him But the conclusion that we are
therefore justified in killing one who lies in wait
for us is perfectly true, though irrelevant to the
case, for it is not yet clear that Clodius lay in wait
for Milo. But while the major premise and the reason may both be true and the conclusion false, yet if
both are false, the conclusion can never be true. Some call the enthymeme a rhetorical syllogism, while
others regard it as a part of the syllogism, because
whereas the latter always has its premises and
conclusion and effects its proof by the employment
of all its parts, the ethymeme is content to let its
proof be understood without explicit statement. The
following is an example of a syllogism The enthymeme draws its conclusion from denial of
consequents. On the other hand
take the following syllogism. The enthymeme draws its conclusion from incompatibles. The following argument is couched
in syllogistic form But for the orator it will be sufficient
to say, I think I have now dealt with all the precepts of
those who treat oratory as a mystery. But these rules
still leave scope for free exercise of the judgment.
For although I consider that there are occasions when the orator may lawfully employ the syllogism, I
am far from desiring him to make his whole speech
consist of or even be crowded with a mass of
epicheiremes and enthymemes. For a speech of that
character would resemble dialogues and dialectical
controversies rather than pleadings of the kind with
which we are concerned, and there is an enormous
difference between the two. For in the former we
are confronted with learned men seeking for truth
among men of learning; consequently they subject
everything to a minute and scrupulous inquiry with
a view to arriving at clear and convincing truths,
and they claim for themselves the tasks of invention
and judgment, calling the former or the
art of selecting the appropriate material for treatment, and the latter or the art of criticism.
We on the other hand have to compose our
speeches for others to judge, and have frequently
to speak before an audience of men who, if not
thoroughly ill-educated, are certainly ignorant of
such arts as dialectic and unless we attract them
by the charm of our discourse or drag them by its
force, and occasionally throw them off their balance
by an appeal to their emotions, we shall be unable
to vindicate the claims of truth and justice. Eloquence aims at being rich, beautiful and commanding,
and will attain to none of these qualities if it be broken
up into conclusive inferences which are generally
expressed in the same monotonous form on the
contrary its meanness will excite contempt, its severity dislike, its elaboration satiety, and its sameness
boredom. Eloquence therefore must not restrict
itself to narrow tracks, but range at large over the
open fields. Its streams must not be conveyed through narrow pipes like the water of fountains,
but flow as mighty rivers flow, filling whole valleys;
and if it cannot find a channel it must make one
for itself. For what can be more distressing than
to be fettered by petty rules, like children who
trace the letters of the alphabet which others have
first written for them, or, as the Greeks say, insist
on keeping the coat their mother gave them.
Are we to have nothing but premises and conclusions from consequents and incompatibles Must
not the orator breathe life into the argument and
develop it Must lie not vary and diversify it by a
thousand figures, and do all this in such a way that
it seems to come into being as the very child of
nature, not to reveal an artificial manufacture and a
suspect art nor at every moment to show traces of
an instructor's hand What orator ever spoke thus
Even in Demosthenes we find but few traces of such
a mechanism. And yet the Greeks of to-day are even
more prone than we are though this is the only
point in which their practice is worse than ours to
bind their thoughts in fetters and to connect them
by an inexorable chain of argument, making inferences where there was never any doubt, proving admitted facts and asserting that in so doing they are
following the orators of old, although they always
refuse to answer the question who it is that they are
imitating. However of figures I shall speak elsewhere. For the present I must add that I do not even
agree with those who hold that arguments should always be expressed in language which is not only pure,
lucid and distinct, but also as free as possible from
all elevation and ornateness. I readily admit that arguments should be distinct and clear, and further
that in arguments of a minor character the language
and words should be as appropriate and as familiar
as possible. But if the subject be one of real importance every kind of ornament should be employed,
so long as it does nothing to obscure our meaning.
For metaphor will frequently throw a flood of light
upon a subject even lawyers, who spend so much
trouble over the appropriateness of words, venture
to assert that the word litus is derived from eludere,
because the shore is a place where the waves break
in play. Further, the more unattractive the natural
appearance of anything, the more does it require
to be seasoned by charm of style moreover, an argument is often less suspect when thus disguised, and
the charm with which it is expressed makes it all the
more convincing to our audience. Unless indeed we
think that Cicero was in error when he introduced
phrases such as the following into an argumentative
passage and However, we must be careful
to observe a happy mean in the employment of such
embellishments, so that they may prove a real ornament and not a hindrance. div1