I now turn to a very different talent, namely
that which dispels the graver emotions of the judge
by exciting his laughter, frequently diverts his attention from the facts of the case, and sometimes even
refreshes him and revives him when he has begun
to be bored or wearied by the case. How hard it
is to attain success in this connexion is shown by
the cases of the two great masters of Greek and
Roman oratory. For many think that Demosthenes
was deficient in this faculty, and that Cicero used
it without discrimination. Indeed, it is impossible
to suppose that Demosthenes deliberately avoided
all display of humour, since his few jests are so
unworthy of his other excellences that they clearly
show that he lacked the power, not merely that he
disliked to use it. Cicero, on the other hand, was
regarded as being unduly addicted to jests, not
merely outside the courts, but in his actual speeches
as well. Personally though whether I am right in
this view, or have been led astray by an exaggerated
admiration for the prince of orators, I cannot say, I regard him as being the possessor of a remarkable
turn of wit. For his daily speech was full of humour,
while in his disputes in court and in his examination
of witnesses he produced more good jests than any
other, while the somewhat insipid jokes which he
launches against Verres are always attributed by him
to others and produced as evidence wherefore, the
more vulgar they are, the more probable is it that
they are not the invention of the orator, but were
current as public property. I wish, however, that
Tiro, or whoever it may have been that published
the three books of Cicero's jests, had restricted their
number and had shown more judgment in selecting
than zeal in collecting them. For he would then
have been less exposed to the censure of his calumniators, although the latter will, in any case, as in
regard to all the manifestations of his genius, find
it easier to detect superfluities than deficiencies.
The chief difficulty which confronts the orator in
this connexion lies in the fact that sayings designed
to raise a laugh are generally untrue and falsehood
always involves a certain meanness, and are often
deliberately distorted, and, further, never complimentary while the judgments formed by the audience
on such jests will necessarily vary, since the effect of
a jest depends not on the reason, but on an emotion
which it is difficult, if not impossible, to describe. For
I do not think that anybody can give an adequate
explanation, though many have attempted to do so, of
the cause of laughter, which is excited not merely
by words or deeds, but sometimes even by touch.
Moreover, there is great variety in the things which
raise a laugh, since we laugh not merely at those
words or actions which are smart or witty, but also at those which reveal folly, anger or fear. Consequently, the cause of laughter is uncertain, since
laughter is never far removed from derision. For,
as Cicero says, and whereas,
when we point to such a blemish in others, the
result is known as wit, it is called folly when the
same jest is turned against ourselves. Now, though laughter may be regarded as a trivial
matter, and an emotion frequently awakened by
buffoons, actors or fools, it has a certain imperious
force of its own which it is very hard to resist. It
often breaks out against our will and extorts confession of its power, not merely from our face and
voice, but convulses the whole body as well. Again,
it frequently turns the scale in matters of great
importance, as I have already observed for instance,
it often dispels hatred or anger. A proof of this is
given by the story of the young men of Tarentum,
who had made a number of scurrilous criticisms of
Pyrrhus over the dinner table they were called
upon to answer for their statements, and, since the
charge was one that admitted neither of denial nor
of excuse, they succeeded in escaping, thanks to a
happy jest which made the king laugh for one of
the accused said, a jest
which succeeded in dissipating the animosity which
the charge had aroused. Still, whatever the essence of humour may be, and
although I would not venture to assert that it is altogether independent of art for it involves a certain
power of observation, and rules for its employment
have been laid down by writers both of Greece and Rome, I will insist on this much, that it depends
mainly on nature and opportunity. The influence
of nature consists not merely in the fact that one
man is quicker or cleverer than another in the
invention of jests for such a power can be increased
by teaching, but also in the possession of some
peculiar charm of look or manner, the effect of which
is such that the same remarks would be less entertaining if uttered by another. Opportunity, on the
other hand, is dependent on circumstances, and is of
such importance that with its assistance not merely
the unlearned, but even mere country bumpkins are
capable of producing effective witticisms while
much again may depend on some previous remark
made by another which will provide opportunity for
repartee. For wit always appears to greater advantage in reply than in attack. We are also confronted by the additional difficulty that there are
no specific exercises for the development of humour
nor professors to teach it. Consequently, while
convivial gatherings and conversation give rise to
frequent displays of wit, since daily practice develops
the faculty, oratorical wit is rare, for it has no fixed
rules to guide it, but must adapt itself to the ways
of the world. There has, however, never been anything to prevent the composition of themes such as
will afford scope for humour, so that our controversial declamations may have an admixture of jests,
while special topics may be set which will give the
young student practice in the play of wit. Nay,
even those pleasantries in which we indulge on
certain occasions of festive licence and to which we
give the name of mots, as, indeed, they are, if only
a little more good sense were employed in their invention, and they were seasoned by a slight admixture of seriousness, might afford a most useful
training. As it is, they serve merely to divert the
young and merrymakers. There are various names by which we describe
wit, but we have only to consider them separately
to perceive their specific meaning. First, there is
urbanitas, which I observe denotes language with a
smack of the city in its words, accent and idiom,
and further suggests a certain tincture of learning
derived from associating with well-educated men;
in a word, it represents the opposite of rusticity.
The meaning of venustus is obvious; it means that
which is said with grace and charm. Salsus is, as
a rule, applied only to what is laughable but this
is not its natural application, although whatever is
laughable should have the salt of wit in it. For
Cicero, when he says that whatever has the salt of
wit is Attic, does not say this because persons of
the Attic school are specially given to laughter;
and again when Catullus says he does not mean that there is nothing in her body to
give cause for laughter. When, therefore, we speak
of the salt of wit, we refer to wit about which there
is nothing insipid, wit, that is to say, which serves
as a simple seasoning of language, a condiment which
is silently appreciated by our judgment, as food is
appreciated by the palate, with the result that it
stimulates our taste and saves a speech from becoming tedious. But just as salt, if sprinkled freely
over food, gives a special relish of its own, so long
as it is not used to excess, so in the case of those
who have the salt of wit there is something about their language which arouses in us a thirst to hear.
Again, I do not regard the epithet facelus as applicable solely to that which raises a laugh. If that
were so Horace would never have said that nature
had granted Vergil the gift of being facetus in song.
I think that the term is rather applied to a certain
grace and polished elegance. This is the meaning
which it bears in Cicero's letters, where he quotes
the words of Brutus, This
meaning suits the passage in Horace, to which I
have already made reference, locus is usually taken to mean
the opposite of seriousness. This view is, however,
somewhat too narrow. For to feign, to terrify, or to
promise, are all at times forms of jesting. Dicacitas
is no doubt derived from dico, and is therefore
common to all forms of wit, but is specially applied
to the language of banter, which is a humorous form
of attack. Therefore, while the critics allow that
Demosthenes was urbanus, they deny that he was
dicax. The essence, however, of the subject which we
are now discussing is the excitement of laughter,
and consequently the whole of this topic is entitled by the Greeks. It has the same primary
division as other departments of oratory, that is to
say, it is concerned with things and words. The
application of humour to oratory may be divided
into three heads for there are three things out of
which we may seek to raise a laugh, to wit, others,
ourselves, or things intermediate. In the first case
we either reprove or refute or make light of or
retort or deride the arguments of others. In the second we speak of things which concern ourselves in a humorous manner and, to quote the
words of Cicero, say things which have a suggestion of absurdity. For there are certain sayings
which are regarded as folly if they slip from us
unawares, but as witty if uttered ironically. The
third kind consists, as Cicero also tells us, in cheating
expectations, in taking words in a different sense
from what was intended, and in other things which
affect neither party to the suit, and which I have,
therefore, styled intermediate. Further, things designed to raise a laugh may either be said or done.
In the latter case laughter is sometimes caused by
an act possessing a certain element of seriousness
as well, as in the case of Marcus Caelius the praetor,
who, when the consul Isauricus broke his curule
chair, had another put in its place, the seat of which
was made of leather thongs, by way of allusion to
the story that the consul had once been scourged
by his father sometimes, again, it is aroused by
an act which passes the grounds of decency, as in
the case of Caelius' box, a jest which was not fit
for an orator or any respectable man to make. On
the other hand the joke may lie in some remark
about a ridiculous look or gesture; such jests are
very attractive, more especially when delivered with
every appearance of seriousness; for there are no
jests so insipid as those which parade the fact that
they are intended to be witty. Still, although the
gravity with which a jest is uttered increases its
attraction, and the mere fact that the speaker does
not laugh himself makes his words laughable, there
is also such a thing as a humorous look, manner or gesture, provided always that they observe the happy
mean. Further, a jest will either be free and lively,
like the majority of those uttered by Aulus Galba,
or abusive, like those with which Junius Bassus
recently made us familiar, or bitter, like those of
Cassius Severus, or gentle, like those of Domitius
Afer. Much depends on the occasion on which a
jest is uttered. For in social gatherings and the intercourse of every day a certain freedom is not unseemly
in persons of humble rank, while liveliness is becoming to all. Our jests should never be designed
to wound, and we should never make it our ideal
to lose a friend sooner than lose a jest. Where the
battles of the courts are concerned I am always
better pleased when it is possible to indulge in
gentle raillery, although it is, of course, permissible
to be abusive or bitter in the words we use against
our opponents, just as it is permissible to accuse
them openly of crime, and to demand the last penalty
of the law. But in the courts as elsewhere it is
regarded as inhuman to hit a man when he is down,
either because he is the innocent victim of misfortune or because such attacks may recoil on those
who make them. Consequently, the first points to
be taken into consideration are who the speaker
is, what is the nature of the case, who is the judge,
who is the victim, and what is the character of
the remarks that are made. It is most unbecoming
for an orator to distort his features or use uncouth
gestures, tricks that arouse such merriment in farce.
No less unbecoming are ribald jests, and such as
are employed upon the stage. As for obscenity, it
should not merely be banished from his language,
but should not even be suggested. For even if our opponent has rendered himself liable to such a
charge, our denunciation should not take the form
of a jest. Further, although I want my orator to
speak with wit, he must not give the impression of
striving after it. Consequently lie must not display
his wit on every possible occasion, but must sacrifice
a jest sooner than sacrifice his dignity. Again, no
one will endure an accuser who employs jests to
season a really horrible case, nor an advocate for the
defence who makes merry over one that calls for pity.
Moreover, there is a type of judge whose temperament is too serious to allow him to tolerate laughter.
It may also happen that a jest directed against an
opponent may apply to the judge or to our own client,
although there are some orators who do not refrain
even from jests that may recoil upon themselves.
This was the case with Sulpicius Longus, who,
despite the fact that he was himself surpassingly
hideous, asserted of a man against whom he was
appearing in a case involving his status as a free
man, that even his face was the face of a slave. To
this Domitius Afer replied, Insolence and arrogance are likewise to
be avoided, nor must our jests seem unsuitable to
the time or place, or give the appearance of studied
premeditation, or smell of the lamp, while those
directed against the unfortunate are, as I have
already said, inhuman. Again, some advocates are
men of such established authority and such known
respectability, that any insolence shown them
would only hurt the assailant. As regards the
way in which we should deal with friends I have
already given instructions. It is the duty not merely of an orator, but of any reasonable human being,
when attacking one whom it is dangerous to offend
to take care that his remarks do not end in exciting
serious enmity, or the necessity for a grovelling
apology. Sarcasm that applies to a number of
persons is injudicious I refer to cases where it is
directed against whole nations or classes of society,
or against rank and pursuits which are common to
many. A good man will see that everything he
says is consistent with his dignity and the respectability of his character; for we pay too dear for the
laugh we raise if it is at the cost of our own integrity. It is, however, a difficult task to indicate the
sources from which laughter may be legitimately
derived or the topics where it may be naturally employed. To attempt to deal exhaustively with the
subject would be an interminable task and a waste
of labour. For the topics suitable to jests are no
less numerous than those from which we may derive
reflexions, as they are called, and are, moreover,
identical with the latter. The powers of invention
and expression come into play no less where jests
are concerned, while as regards expression its force
will depend in part on the choice of words, in part
on the figures employed. Laughter then will be
derived either from the physical appearance of our
opponent or from his character as revealed in his
words and actions, or from external sources; for all
forms of raillery come under one or other of these
heads; if the raillery is serious, we style it as
severe; if, on the other hand, it is of a lighter
character, we regard it as humorous. These themes
for jest may be pointed out to the eye or described
in words or indicated by some mot. It is only on rare occasions that it is possible to make them
visible to the eye, as Gaius Julius did when Helvius Mancia kept clamouring against him. he cried, and then, as
Mancia persisted in asking him to do so, pointed
with his finger at the picture of a Gaul painted on
a Cimbric shield, a figure to which Mancia bore a
striking resemblance. There were shops round the
forum and the shield had been hung up over one
of them by way of a sign. The narration of a
humorous story may often be used with clever effect
and is a device eminently becoming to an orator.
Good examples are the story told of Caepasius and
Fabricius, which Cicero tells in the pro Cluentio, or
the story told by Caelius of the dispute between
Decimus Laelius and his colleague when they were
both in a hurry to reach their province first. But
in all such cases the whole narrative must possess
elegance and charm, while the orator's own contribution to the story should be the most humorous
element. Take for instance the way in which Cicero
gives a special relish to the flight of Fabricius. I will not quote the rest of the passage,
for it is well known. But he develops the theme still further although the plain facts amount simply
to this, that Fabricius had left the court. The
whole of the story told by Caelius is full of wit and
invention, but the gem of the passage is its conclusion. Cicero
thinks that humour belongs to narrative and wit to
sallies against the speaker's antagonist. Domitius
Afer showed remarkable finish in this department;
for, while narratives of the kind I have described
are frequent in his speeches, several books have been
published of his witticisms as well. This latter form
of wit lies not merely in sallies and brief displays of
wit, but may be developed at greater length, witness
the story told by Cicero in the second book of his
de Oratore, in which Lucius Crassus dealt with
Brutus, against whom he was appearing in court.
Brutus was prosecuting Cnaeus Plancus and had
produced two readers to show that Lucius Crassus,
who was counsel for the defence, in the speech
which he delivered on the subject of the colony of
Narbo had advocated measures contrary to those
which he recommended in speaking of the Servilian
law. Crassus, in reply, called for three readers and
gave them the dialogues of Brutus' father to read
out. One of these dialogues was represented as
taking place on his estate at Privernum, the second
on his estate at Alba, and the third on his estate at
Tibur. Crassus then asked where these estates were.
Now Brutus had sold them all, and in those days it
was considered somewhat discreditable to sell one's paternal acres. Similar attractive effects of narrative
may be produced by the narration of fables or at
times even of historical anecdotes. On the other hand brevity in wit gives greater
point and speed. It may be employed in two ways,
according as we are the aggressors, or are replying
to our opponents; the method, however, in both
cases is to some extent the same. For there is
nothing that can be said in attack that cannot
be used in riposte. But there are certain points
which are peculiar to reply. For remarks designed
for attack are usually brought ready-made into
court, after long thought at home, whereas those
made in reply are usually improvised during a dispute or the cross-examination of witnesses. But
though there are many topics on which we may
draw for our jests, I must repeat that not all these
topics are becoming to orators above all doubles
entendres and obscenity, such as is dear to the Atellan
farce, are to be avoided, as also are those coarse
jibes so common on the lips of the rabble, where
the ambiguity of words is turned to the service of
abuse. I cannot even approve of a similar from of
jest, that sometimes slipped out even from Cicero,
though not when he was pleading in the courts
for example, once when a candidate, alleged to be
the son of a cook, solicited someone else's vote in
his presence, he said, Ego quoque tibi favebo. I say
this not because I object absolutely to all play on
words capable of two different meanings, but because
such jests are rarely effective, unless they are helped
out by actual facts as well as similarity of sound. For example, I regard the jest which Cicero levelled
against that same Isauricus, whom I mentioned
above, as being little less than sheer buffoonery. he said, On the other hand, the following
instance of the same type of wit is quite admirable
when Milo's accuser, by way of proving that he had
lain in wait for Clodius, alleged that he had put up
at Bovillae before the ninth hour in order to wait
until Clodius left his villa, and kept repeating the
question, , Cicero replied, a retort which in itself justifies us
in refusing to exclude this type of wit altogether.
Sometimes, too, the same word may be used not
merely in several senses, but in absolutely opposite
senses. For example, Nero said of a dishonest
slave, Such ambiguity may even go so far as to present all the
appearance of a riddle, witness the jest that Cicero
made at the expense of Pletorius, the accuser of
Fonteius he said, The explanation is that in her lifetime women
of infamous character used to frequent her
house, while after her death her property was
sold. I may note however that ludus, is used
metaphorically in the sense of school, while
magisiri is used ambiguously. A similar form of jest may be made by use of the figure known as
metalepsis, as when Fabius Maximus complained of
the meagreness of the gifts made by Augustus to
his friends, and said that his congiaria were heminaria for congiarium implies at once liberality and
a particular measure, and Fabius put a slight on the
liberality of Augustus by a reference to the measure.
This form of jest is as poor as is the invention of
punning names by the addition, subtraction or change
of letters I find, for instance, a case where a certain
Acisculus was called Pacisculus because of some which he had made, while one Placidus
was nicknamed Acidus because of his temper,
and one Tullius was dubbed Tollius because he was
a thief. Such puns are more successful with things
than names. It was, for example, a neat hit of
Afer's when he said that Manlius Sura, who kept
rushing to and fro while he was pleading, waving
his hands, letting his toga fall and replacing it, was
not merely pleading, but giving himself a lot of
needless trouble. For there is a spice of wit about
the word satagere in itself, even if there were no
resemblance to any other word. Similar jests may
be produced by the addition or removal of the
aspirate, or by splitting up a word or joining it to
another the effect is generally poor, but the practice
is occasionally permissible. Jests drawn from names
are of the same type. Cicero introduces a number
of such jests against Verres, but always as quotations from others. On one occasion he says that he
would sweep everything away, for his name was
Verres; on another, that he had given more trouble
to Hercules, whose temple he had pillaged, than
was given by the Erymanthine ; on another,
that he was a bad who had left so worthless
a pig behind him. For Verres' predecessor was
named Sacerdos. Sometimes, however, a lucky
chance may give us an opportunity of employing
such jests with effect, as for instance when Cicero
in the pro Caecina says of the witness Sextus
Clodius Phormio, We may note therefore that jests which turn on
the meaning of things are at once more pointed and
more elegant. In such cases resemblances between
things produce the best effects, more especially
if we refer to something of an inferior or more trivial
nature, as in the jests of which our forefathers were
so fond, when they called Lentulus Spinther and
Scipio Serapio. But such jests may be drawn not
merely from the names of men, but from animals as
well; for example when I was a boy, Junius Bassus,
one of the wittiest of men, was nicknamed the white
ass. And Sarmentus compared Messius Cicirrus
to a wild horse. The comparison may also be
drawn from inanimate objects for example Publius
Blessius called a certain Julius, who was dark, lean
and bent, the iron buckle. This method of raising
a laugh is much in vogue to-day. Such resemblances may be put to the service of wit either openly or
allusively. Of the latter type is the remark of
Augustus, made to a soldier who showed signs of
timidity in presenting a petition, Some
of these jests turn on similarity of meaning. Of
this kind was the witticism uttered by Vatinius when
he was prosecuted by Calvus. Vatinius was wiping
his forehead with a white handkerchief, and his
accuser called attention to the unseemliness of the
act. Whereupon Vatinius replied, Still more ingenious is the application of
one thing to another on the ground of some resemblance, that is to say the adaptation to one thing of
a circumstance which usually applies to something
else, a type of jest which we may regard as being an
ingenious form of fiction. For example, when ivory
models of captured towns were carried in Caesar's
triumphal procession, and a few days later wooden
models of the same kind were carried at the triumph
of Fabius Maximus, Chrysippus remarked that the
latter were the cases for Caesar's ivory towns. And
Pedo said of a heavy-armed gladiator who was
pursuing another armed with a net and failed to
strike him, Resemblance and ambiguity may be used in conjunction
Galba for example said to a man who stood very
much at his ease when playing ball, The ambiguity lies in the word stand, while the indifference
shewn by the player supplies the resemblance. I
need say no more on this form of humour. But the
practice of combining different types of jest is very
common, and those are best which are of this composite character. A like use may be made of dissimilarity. Thus a Roman knight was once drinking
at tile games, and Augustus sent him the following
message, To which
the other replied, Contraries give rise to more than
one kind of jest. For instance the following jests
made by Augustus and Galba differ in form. Augustus
was engaged in dismissing an officer with dishonour
from his service the officer kept interrupting him
with entreaties and said, Augustus replied, Galba, when a friend asked
him for the loan of a cloak, said, the point being
that the rain was pouring through the roof of his
garret at the time. I will add a third example,
although out of respect to its author I withhold his
name where
we are surprised by the appearance of a word which
is the very opposite of what we should have expected.
Under the same heading, although it is quite
different from any of the preceding, we must place
the remark made by Marcus Vestinus when it was
reported to him that a certain man was dead. was his reply.
But I shall overload this book with illustrations and
turn it into a common jest-book, if I continue to
quote each jest that was made by our forefathers. All forms of argument afford equal opportunity for
jests. Augustus for example employed definition
when he said of two ballet-dancers who were engaged
in a contest, turn and turn about, as to who could make
tile most exquisite gestures, that one was a dancer and
the other merely interrupted the dancing. Galba on
the other hand made use of partition when he replied
to a friend who asked him for a cloak, Similar material for jests is supplied by genus, species, property, difference, conjugates, adjuncts, antecedents, consequents, contraries,
causes, effects, and comparisons of things greater,
equal, or less, as it is also by all forms of trope. Are
not a large number of jests made by means of hyperbole Take for instance Cicero's remark about a
man who was remarkable for his height, or the remark
made by Publius Oppius about the family of the
Lentuli to the effect, that since the children were
always smaller than their parents, the race would Again, what of irony Is not
even the most severe form of irony a kind of jest
Afer made a witty use of it when he replied to Didius
Callus, who, after making the utmost efforts to secure
a provincial government, complained on receiving
the appointment that he had been forced into accepting, Cicero also employed metaphor to serve
his jest, when on receiving a report of uncertain
authorship to the effect that Vatinius was dead,
he remarked, He also employed
allegory in the witticism that he was fond of making
about Marcus Caelius, who was better at bringing
charges than at defending his client against them, to
the effect that he had a good right hand, but a weak
left. As an example of the use of emphasis I may
quote the jest of Aulus Villius, that Tuccius was
killed by his sword falling upon him. Figures of
thought, which the Greeks call may
be similarly employed, and some writers have classified jests under their various headings. For we ask
questions, express doubts, make assertions, threaten,
wish and speak in pity or in anger. And everything
is laughable that is obviously a pretence. It is easy
to make fun of folly, for folly is laughable in itself;
but we may improve such jests by adding something
of our own. Titius Maximus put a foolish question
to Campatius, who was leaving the theatre, when he
asked him if he had been watching the play. replied Campatius, whereby lie made the question seem even more
foolish than it actually was. Refutation consists in denying, rebutting, defending or making light of a charge, and each of these
affords scope for humour. Manius Curius, for example,
showed humour in the way in which he denied a
charge that had been brought against him. His
accuser had produced a canvas, in every scene of
which he was depicted either as naked and in prison
or as being restored to freedom by his friends paying
off his gambling debts. His only comment was, Sometimes we rebut a charge openly, as Cicero did when he refuted the
extravagant lies of Vibius Curius about his age he remarked, At other times we may rebut
it by pretending to agree. Cicero, for example, when
Fabia the wife of Dolabella asserted that her age was
thirty, remarked, Sometimes too it is
effective to add something more biting in place of
the charge which is denied, as was done by Junius
Bassus when Domitia the wife of Passienus complained that by way of accusing her of meanness he
had alleged that she even sold old shoes. he replied, A witty travesty of defence
was once produced by a Roman knight who was
charged by Augustus with having squandered his
patrimony. he answered. As regards making light of a charge, there
are two ways in which this may be done. We may
throw cold water on the excessive boasted of our
opponent, as was done by Gaius Caesar, when Pomponius displayed a wound in his face which he had
received in the rebellion of Sulpicius and which he
boasted he had received while fighting for Caesar he retorted, Or we may do the same
with some charge that is brought against us, as was
done by Cicero when he remarked to those who
reproached him for marrying Publilia, a young unwedded girl, when he was already over sixty, Some style this
type of jest consequent and, on the ground that both jests seem to follow so naturally and inevitably, class
it with the jest which Cicero levelled against Curio,
who always began his speeches by asking indulgence
for his youth he said. Another method of making
light of a statement is to suggest a reason. Cicero
employed this method against Vatinius. The latter
was lame and, wishing to make it seem that his health
was improved, said that he could now walk as much
as two miles. said Cicero, Again Augustus, when the inhabitants of
Tarraco reported that a palm had sprung up on the
altar dedicated to him, replied, Cassius Severus
showed his wit by transferring a charge made against
himself to a different quarter. For when lie was
reproached by the praetor on the ground that his
advocates had insulted Lucius Varus, an Epicurean
and a friend of Caesar, he replied, Of retorts there are a number of forms, the wittiest
being that which is helped out by a certain verbal
similarity, as in the retort made by Trachalus to
Suelius. The latter had said,  to which Trachalus replied, Cassius Severus baffled an opponent who reproached
him with the fact that Proculeius had forbidden him
to enter his house by replying, But one jest may also be defeated by another for
example, Augustus of blessed memory, when the
Gauls gave him a golden necklet weighing a hundred
pounds, and Dolabella, speaking in jest but with an eye to the success of his jest, said, replied, So, too, one lie may be
defeated by another Galba, for instance, when
someone told him that he once bought a lamprey
five feet long for half a denarius in Sicily, replied, Then there is the opposite of denial, namely a feigned
confession, which likewise may show no small wit.
Thus Afer, when pleading against a freedman of
Claudius Caesar and when another freedman called
out from the opposite side of the court, replied, A
similar trick is not to deny a charge, though it is
obviously false and affords good opportunity for an
excellent reply. For example, when Philippus said
to Catulus, the latter replied, To make jokes against oneself is
scarcely fit for any save professed buffoons and is
strongly to be disapproved in an orator. This form
of jest has precisely the same varieties as those which
we make against others and therefore I pass it by,
although it is not infrequently employed. On the
other hand scurrilous or brutal jests, although they
may raise a laugh, are quite unworthy of a gentleman. I remember a jest of this kind being made by a certain man against an inferior who had spoken
with some freedom against him In such cases it is difficult to say
whether the audience should laugh or be angry. There remains the prettiest of all forms of humour,
namely the jest which depends for success on deceiving anticipations or taking another's words in a
sense other than he intended. The unexpected
element may be employed by the attacking party,
as in the example cited by Cicero, or in the
remark of Afer, Or it may be employed to
meet a statement made by another, as it was by
Cicero on hearing a false report of Vatinius' death
he had met one of the latter's freedmen and asked
him, The freedman answered, To which Cicero replied,
But the loudest laughter of all is produced by simulation and dissimulation, proceedings which differ but
little and are almost identical; but whereas simulation
implies the pretence of having a certain opinion of
one's own, dissimulation consists in feigning that
one does not understand someone else's meaning.
Afer employed simulation, when his opponents in a
certain case kept saying that Celsina who was an
influential lady knew all about the facts, and he,
pretending to believe that she was a man, said, Cicero on the other hand employed dissimulation when Sextus Annalis gave evidence damaging
to the client whom lie was defending, and the accuser
kept pressing him with the question, To which he replied by beginning to recite the Sixth
book of the Annals of Ennius, which commences with
the line, This kind of jest finds its most frequent opportunity
in ambiguity, as for example, when Cascellius, on
being consulted by a client who said, replied, But there are also other ways of distorting the
meaning; we may for instance give a serious statement a comparatively trivial sense, like the man who,
when asked what he thought of a man who had been
caught in the act of adultery, replied that he had
been too slow in his movements. Of a similar nature
are jests whose point lies in insinuation. Such was
the reply which Cicero quotes as given to the man
who complained that his wife had hung herself on a
fig-tree. said someone, For there the meaning is obvious, though it is not expressed in so many
words. Indeed the essence of all wit lies in the
distortion of the true and natural meaning of words
a perfect instance of this is when we misrepresent
our own or another's opinions or assert some impossibility. Juba misrepresented another man's opinion, when he replied to one who complained of
being bespattered by his horse, Gaius Cassius misrepresented his own, when he said to a soldier whom he saw hurrying into battle without his sword, So
too did Galba, when served with some fish that had
been partially eaten the day before and had been
placed on the table with the uneaten sides turned
uppermost he said, Lastly there is the jibe that Cicero
made against Curius, which I have already cited;
for it was clearly impossible that he should be still
unborn at a time when he was already declaiming.
There is also a form of misrepresentation which has
its basis in irony, of which a saying of Gaius Caesar
will provide an example. A witness asserted that
the accused attempted to wound him in the thighs,
and although it would have been easy to ask him
why he attacked that portion of his body above all
others, he merely remarked, Best of all is it when pretence is met by
pretence, as was done in the following instance by
Domitius Afer. He had made his will long ago,
and one of his more recent friends, in the hopes of
securing a legacy if he could persuade him to change
it, produced a fictitious story and asked him whether
he should advise a senior centurion who, being an old
man, had already made his will to revise it; to which
Afer replied, But the most agreeable of all jests are those which
are good humoured and easily digested. Take
another example from Afer. Noting that an ungrateful client avoided him in the forum, he sent his
servant to him to say, Again when his steward, being unable to account for certain sums
of money, kept saying, he replied, Such jests the Greeks
style or adapted to character. It is a
pleasant form of jest to reproach a person with less
than would be possible, as Afer did when, in answer
to a candidate who said, he replied, although he might
easily have denied the statement, Sometimes it may be a good joke to
speak of oneself, while one may often raise a laugh
by reproaching a person to his face with things that
it would have been merely bad-mannered to bring
up against him behind his back. Of this kind was the
remark made by Augustus, when a soldier was making some unreasonable request and Marcianus, whom
he suspected of intending to make some no less
unfair request, turned up at the same moment Apt quotation of verse may add to the effect of
wit. The lines may be quoted in their entirety
without alteration, which is so easy a task that Ovid
composed an entire book against bad poets out of
lines taken from the quatrains of Macer. Such a
procedure is rendered specially attractive if it be
seasoned by a spice of ambiguity, as in the line
which Cicero quoted against Lartius, a shrewd and
cunning fellow who was suspected of unfair dealing
in a certain case, Or the words may be slightly altered, as in the line
quoted against the senator who, although he had always in previous times been regarded as an utter
fool, was, after inheriting an estate, asked to speak
first on a motion where legacy is substituted for the original faculty.
Or again we may invent verses resembling well known lines, a trick styled parody by the Greeks.
A neat application of proverbs may also be effective,
as when one man replied to another, a worthless
fellow, who had fallen down and asked to be helped
to his feet, Or we may shew our culture by drawing on legend for a jest, as Cicero did in the trial of
Verres, when Hortensius said to him as he was
examining a witness, said Cicero, Hortensius had
received a bronze Sphinx of great value as a present
from Verres. Effects of mild absurdity are produced by the
simulation of folly and would, indeed, themselves,
be foolish were they not fictitious. Take as an
example the remark of the man who, when people
wondered why he had bought a stumpy candlestick,
said, There are also sayings closely resembling absurdities which derive
great point from their sheer irrelevance, like the
reply of Dolabella's slave, who, on being asked
whether his master had advertised a sale of his
property, answered, Sometimes you may get out of a tight comer by
giving a humorous explanation of your embarrassment, as the man did who asked a witness, who
alleged that lie had been wounded by the accused,
whether he had any scar to show for it. The witness
proceeded to show a huge scar on his thigh, on which
lie remarked, A happy use may also be made of insult.
Hispo, for example, when the accuser charged him
with scandalous crimes, replied, ; while Fulvius Propinquus,
when asked by the representative of the emperor
whether the documents which he produced were
autographs, replied, Such I have either learned from others or discovered from my own experience to be the commonest sources of humour. But I must repeat that
the number of ways in which one may speak wittily
are of no less infinite variety than those in which one
may speak seriously, for they depend on persons,
place, time and chances, which are numberless. I
have, therefore, touched on the topics of humour
that I may not be taxed with having omitted them;
but with regard to my remarks on the actual practice and manner of jesting, I venture to assert that
they are absolutely indispensable. To these Domitius Marsus, who wrote an elaborate
treatise on Urbanity, adds several types of saying,
which are not laughable, but rather elegant sayings
with a certain charm and attraction of their own,
which are suitable even to speeches of the most
serious kind they are characterized by a certain
urbane wit, but not of a kind to raise a laugh. And as a matter of fact his work was not designed to deal
with humour, but with urbane wit, a quality which
he regards as peculiar to this city, though it was not
till a late period that it was understood in this sense,
after the word Urbs had come to be accepted as indicating Rome without the addition of any proper
noun. He defines it as follows But this
definition, if we except the quality of brevity, includes all the virtues of oratory. For it is entirely
concerned with persons and things to deal with
which in appropriate language is nothing more nor
less than the task of perfect eloquence. Why he
insisted on brevity being essential I do not know,
since in the same book he asserts that many speakers
have revealed their urbanity in narrative. And a little
later he gives the following definition, which is, as
he says, based on the views expressed by Cato But if we
accept these definitions, we shall have to allow the
title of urbane to anything that is well said. It was
natural therefore that the author of this definition
should classify such sayings under three heads,
serious, humorous and intermediate, since all good sayings may be thus classified. But, in my opinion,
there are certain forms of humorous saying that may
be regarded as not possessing sufficient urbanity. For
to my thinking urbanity involves the total absence of
all that is incongruous, coarse, unpolished and exotic
whether in thought, language, voice or gesture, and
resides not so much in isolated sayings as in the
whole complexion of our language, just as for the
Greeks Atticism means that elegance of taste which
was peculiar to Athens. However, out of respect to
the judgment of Marsus, who was a man of the
greatest learning, I will add that he divides serious
utterances into three classes, the honorific, the
derogatory and the intermediate. As an example
of the honorific he quotes the words uttered by
Cicero in the pro Ligario with reference to Caesar, The
derogatory he illustrates by the words used by
Cicero of Pompey and Caesar in a letter to Atticus Finally, he illustrates the intermediate, which he calls apophthegmatic as it is, by
the passage from Cicero's speech against Catiline
where he says, All these
are admirable sayings, but what special title they
have to be called urbane I do not see. If it is
not merely, as I think, the whole complexion of
our oratory that deserves this title, but if it is to
be claimed for individual sayings as well, I should
give the name only to those sayings that are of
the same general character as humorous sayings,
without actually being humorous. I will give an illustration of what I mean. It was said of Asinius
Pollio, who had equal gifts for being grave or gay,
that he was and of a pleader
who was a fluent speaker extempore, that Of the same kind,
too, was the remark recorded by Marsus as having
been made by Pompey to Cicero when the latter
expressed distrust of his party Had this last remark
been uttered on a less serious subject and with less
serious purpose, or had it not been uttered by Pompey
himself, we might have counted it among examples
of humour. I may also add the words used by
Cicero in a letter to Caerellia to explain why he
endured the supremacy of Caesar so patiently for here again the
word has a spice of humour in it. I felt
that I ought not to conceal my feelings on this point.
If I am wrong in my views, I shall not, at any rate,
lead my readers astray, since I have stated the opposite view as well, which they are at liberty to adopt
if they prefer it. IV. With regard to the principles to be observed
in forensic debate, it might seem that I should
delay such instructions until I had finished dealing
with all the details of continuous speaking, since
such debates come after the set speeches are done.
But since the art of debate turns on invention alone,
does not admit of arrangement, has little need for
the embellishments of style, and makes no large
demand on memory or delivery, I think that it will
not be out of place to deal with it here before I
proceed to the second of the five parts, since it is entirely dependent on the first. Other writers have
omitted to deal with it on the ground perhaps that
they thought the subject had been sufficiently covered
by their precepts on other topics. For debate consists in attack and defence, on which enough has
already been said, since whatever is useful in a continuous speech for the purpose of proof must necessarily be of service in this brief and discontinuous
form of oratory. For we say the same things in
debate, though we say them in a different manner,
since debate consists of questions and replies, a topic
with which we have dealt fairly exhaustively in
connexion with the examination of witnesses. But
since this work is designed on an ample scale and
since no one can be called a perfect orator unless he
be an expert debater, we must devote a little special
attention to this accomplishment as well, which as a
matter of fact is not seldom the deciding factor in a
forensic victory. For just as the continuous speech
is the predominant weapon in general questions of
quality where the inquiry is as to whether an act
was right or wrong, and as a rule is adequate to
clear up questions of definition and almost all those
in which the facts are ascertained or inferred by
conjecture from artificial proof, so on the other
hand those cases, which are the most frequent of all
and depend on proofs which are either entirely
inartificial or of a composite character, give rise
to the most violent debates; in fact I should say
that there is no occasion when the advocate has to
come to closer grips with his adversary. For all the
strongest points of the argument have to be sharply
impressed on the memory of the judge, while we
have also to make good all the promises we may have made in the course of our speech and to refute
the lies of our opponents. There is no point of a
trial where the judge's attention is keener. And
even mediocre speakers have not without some reason
acquired the reputation of being good advocates
simply by their excellence in debate. Some on the
other hand think they have done their duty to their
clients by an ostentatious and fatiguing display of
elaborate declamation and straightway march out of
court attended by an applauding crowd and leave the
desperate battle of debate to uneducated performers
who often are of but humble origin. As a result
in private suits you will generally find that different
counsel are employed to plead and to prove the case.
If the duties of advocacy are to be thus divided, the
latter duty must surely be accounted the more
important of the two, and it is a disgrace to oratory
that inferior advocates should be regarded as adequate
to render the greater service to the litigants. In
public cases at any rate the actual pleader is cited
by the usher as well as the other advocates.
For debate the chief requisites are a quick and
nimble understanding and a shrewd and ready judgment. For there is no time to think; the advocate
must speak at once and return the blow almost
before it has been dealt by his opponent. Consequently while it is most important for every portion
of the case that the advocate should not merely have
given a careful study to the whole case, but that he
should have it at his fingers' ends, when he comes
to the debate it is absolutely necessary that he
should possess a thorough acquaintance with all the
persons, instruments and circumstances of time and
place involved otherwise he will often be reduced to silence and forced to give a hurried assent to
those who prompt him as to what he should say,
suggestions which are often perfectly fatuous owing
to excess of zeal on the part of the prompter. As a
result it sometimes happens that we are put to the
blush by too ready acceptance of the foolish suggestions of another. Moreover, we have to deal with
others beside these prompters who speak for our ear
alone. Somego so far as to turn the debate into an open
brawl. For you may sometimes see several persons
shouting angrily at the judge and telling him that the
arguments thus suggested are contrary to the truth,
and calling his attention to the fact that some point
which is prejudicial to the case has been deliberately
passed over in silence. Consequently the skilled
debater must be able to control his tendency to
anger; there is no passion that is a greater enemy
to reason, while it often leads an advocate right
away from the point and forces him both to use
gross and insulting language and to receive it in
return; occasionally it will even excite him to such
an extent as to attack the judges. Moderation, and
sometimes even longsuffering, is the better policy,
for the statements of our opponents have not merely
to be refuted they are often best treated with contempt, made light of or held up to ridicule, methods
which afford unique opportunity for the display of
wit. This injunction, however, applies only so long
as the case is conducted with order and decency if,
on the other hand, our opponents adopt turbulent
methods we must put on a bold front and resist
their impudence with courage. For there are some
advocates so brazen-faced that they bluster and
bellow at us, interrupt us in the middle of a sentence and try to throw everything into confusion. While,
then, it would be wrong to pay them the compliment of imitation, we must none the less repel their
onslaughts with vigour by crushing their insolence
and making frequent appeals to the judges or presiding magistrates to insist on the observance of the
proper order of speaking. The debater's task is
not one that suits a meek temper or excessive
modesty, and we are apt to be misled because that
which is really weakness is dignified by the name of
honesty. But the quality which is the most serviceable in debate is acumen, which while it is not the
result of art for natural gifts cannot be taught,
may none the less be improved by art. In this
connexion the chief essential is never for a moment
to lose sight either of the question at issue or the
end which we have in view. If we bear this in
mind, we shall never descend to mere brawling
nor waste the time allotted to the case by indulging
in abuse, while we shall rejoice if our adversary
does so. Those who have given a careful study to the arguments that are likely to be produced by their
opponents or the replies which may be made by
themselves are almost always ready for the fray.
There is, however, a further device available which
consists in suddenly introducing into the debate arguments which were deliberately concealed in our set
speech it is a procedure which resembles a surprise
attack or a sally from an ambush. The occasion for
its employment arises when there is some point to
which it is difficult to improvise an answer, though
it would not be difficult to meet if time were
allowed for consideration. For solid and irrefutable arguments are best produced at once in the actual
pleading in order that they may be repeated and
treated at greater length. I think I need hardly
insist on the necessity for the avoidance in debate of
mere violence and noise and such forms of pleasantry
as are dear to tile uneducated. For unscrupulous
violence, although annoying to one's antagonist,
makes an unpleasant impression on the judge. It is
also bad policy to light hard for points which you
cannot prove. For where defeat is inevitable, it is
wisest to yield, since, if there are a number of other
points in dispute, we shall find it easier to prove
what remains, while if there is only one point at
issue, surrender with a good grace will generally
secure some mitigation of punishment. For obstinacy
in the defence of a fault, more especially after detection, is simply the commission of a fresh fault. While the battle still rages, the task of luring on
our adversary when he has once committed himself
to error, and of forcing him to commit himself as
deeply as possible, even to the extent at times of
being puffed up with extravagant hopes of success,
requires great prudence and skill. It is, therefore,
wise to conceal some of our weapons for our
opponents will often press their attack and stake
everything on some imagined weakness of our own,
and will give fresh weight to our proofs by the
instancy with which they demand us to produce
them. It may even be expedient to yield ground
which the enemy thinks advantageous to himself
for in grasping at the fancied advantage he may
be forced to surrender some greater advantage at
times, too, it may serve our purpose to give him a
choice between two alternatives, neither of which he can select without damage to his cause. Such
a course is more effective in debate than in a set
speech, for the reason that in the latter we reply
to ourselves, while in the former our opponent
replies, and thereby delivers himself into our hands.
It is, above all, the mark of a shrewd debater to
perceive what remarks impress the judge and what
he rejects this may often be detected from his
looks, and sometimes from some action or utterance.
Arguments which help us must be pressed home,
while it will be wise to withdraw as gently as
possible from such as are of no service. We may
take a lesson from doctors who continue or cease
to administer remedies according as they note that
they are received or rejected by the stomach.
Sometimes, if we find difficulty in developing our
point, it is desirable to raise another question and
to divert the attention of the judge to it if this be
feasible. For what can you do, if you are unable
to answer an argument, save invent another to which
your opponent can give no answer In most respects the rules to be observed in debate are, as I
have said, identical with those for the cross examination of witnesses, the only difference lying in the
fact that the debate is a battle between advocates,
whereas cross-examination is a fight between advocate
and witness. To practise the art of debate is, however, far
easier. For it is most profitable to agree with
a fellow-student on some subject, real or fictitious,
and to take different sides, debating it as would
be done in the courts. The same may also be
done with the simpler class of questions. I
would further have an advocate realise the order in which his proofs should be presented to the judge
the method to be followed is the same as in arguments the strongest should be placed first and
last. For those which are presented first dispose
the judge to believe us, and those which come last
to decide in our favour. V. Having dealt with these points to the best of
my ability, I should have had no hesitation in proceeding to discuss arrangement, which is logically
the next consideration, did I not fear that, since
there are some who include judgment under the
head of invention, they might think that I had
deliberately omitted all discussion of judgment,
although personally I regard it as so inextricably
blent with and involved in every portion of this
work, that its influence extends even to single
sentences or words, and it is no more possible to
teach it than it is to instruct the powers of taste
and smell. Consequently, all I can do is now and
hereafter to show what should be done or avoided
in each particular case, with a view thereby to guide
the judgment. What use then is it for me to lay
down general rules to the effect that we should not
attempt impossibilities, that we should avoid whatever contradicts our case or is common to both, and
shun all incorrectness or obscurity of style In all
these cases it is common sense that must decide,
and common sense cannot be taught. There is no great difference, in my opinion,
between judgment and sagacity, except that the
former deals with evident facts, while the latter is
concerned with hidden facts or such as have not
yet been discovered or still remain in doubt. Again
judgment is more often than not a matter of certainty, while sagacity is a form of reasoning from
deep-lying premises, which generally weighs and
compares a number of arguments and in itself
involves both invention and judgment. But here
again you must not expect me to lay down any
general rules. For sagacity depends on circumstances
and will often find its scope in something preceding
the pleading of the cause. For instance in the prosecution of Verres Cicero seems to have shown the
highest sagacity in preferring to cut down the time
available for his speech rather than allow the trial to
be postponed to the following year when Quintus
Hortensius was to be consul. And again in the
actual pleading sagacity holds the first and most
important place. For it is the duty of sagacity to
decide what we should say and what we should pass
by in silence or postpone; whether it is better to
deny an act or to defend it, when we should employ
an exordium and on what lines it should be designed,
whether we should make a statement of facts and if
so, how, whether we should base our plea on law or
equity and what is the best order to adopt, while it
must also decide on all the nuances of style, and
settle whether it is expedient to speak harshly,
gently or even with humility. But I have already
given advice on all these points as far as each
occasion permitted, and I shall continue to do the
same in the subsequent portions of this work. In
the meantime, however, I will give a few instances
to make my meaning clearer, since it is not possible,
in my opinion, to do so by laying down general rules.
We praise Demosthenes for his sagacity because
when he urged a policy of war upon the Athenians
after they had met with a series of reverses, he pointed out that so far their action had been entirely
irrational. For they might still make amends for their
negligence, whereas, if they had made no mistakes,
they would have had no ground for hopes of better
success in the future. Again, since he feared to
give offence if he taxed the people with lack of
energy in defending the liberties of their country,
he preferred to praise their ancestors for their
courageous policy. Thus lie gained a ready hearing,
with the natural result that the pride which they
felt in the heroic past made them repent of their
own degenerate behaviour. If we turn to Cicero, we
shall find that one speech alone, the pro Cluenltio,
will suffice to provide a number of examples. The
difficulty is to know what special exhibition of sagacity to admire most in this speech. His opening
statement of the case, by which he discredited the
mother whose authority pressed so hardly on her
son The fact that he preferred to throw the
charge of having bribed the jury back upon his
opponents rather than deny it on account of what he
calls the notorious infamy of the verdict Or his
recourse, last of all, to the support of the law in spite
of the odious nature of the affair, a method by which
lie would have set the judges against him but for
the fact that he had already softened their feelings
towards him Or the skill which lie shows in stating that he has adopted this course in spite of the
protests of his client What again am I to select as
an outstanding instance of his sagacity in the pro
Milone The fact that he refrains from proceeding
to his statement of facts until he has cleared the
ground by disposing of the previous verdicts against
the accused The manner in which he turns the odium of the attempted ambush against Clodius,
although as a matter of fact the encounter was a
pure chance The way in which he at one and the
same time praised the actual deed and showed that
it was forced upon his client Or the skill with
which he avoided making Milo plead for consideration and undertook the role of suppliant himself
It would be an endless task to quote all the instances
of his sagacity, how he discredited Cotta, how he
put forward his own case in defence of Ligarius and
saved Cornelius by his bold admission of the facts.
It is enough, I think, to say that there is nothing
not merely in oratory, but in all the tasks of life
that is more important than sagacity and that without it all formal instruction is given in vain, while
prudence unsupported by learning will accomplish
more than learning unsupported by prudence. It is
sagacity again that teaches us to adapt our speech to
circumstances of time and place and to the persons
with whom we are concerned. But since this topic
covers a wide field and is intimately connected with
eloquence itself, I shall reserve my treatment of it
till I come to give instructions on the subject of
appropriateness in speaking. div1