As to the material of oratory, some have
asserted that it is speech, as for instance Gorgias in
the dialogue of Plato. If this view be accepted in
the sense that the word is used of a discourse composed on any subject, then it is not the
material, but the work, just as a statue is the work
of the sculptor. For speeches like statues require
art for their production. If on the other hand
we interpret as indicating the words
themselves, they can do nothing unless they are
related to facts. Some again hold that the material
consists of persuasive arguments. But they form
part of the work, are produced by art and require
material themselves. Some say that political
questions provide the material. The mistake made
by these lies not in the quality of their opinion
but in its limitation. For political questions are
material for eloquence but not the only material. Some, on the ground that rhetoric is a virtue, make the
material with which it deals to be the whole of life.
Others, on the ground that life regarded as a whole
does not provide material for every virtue, since
most of them are concerned only with departments
of life justice, courage and self-control each having
their own duties and their own end, would consequently restrict oratory to one particular department
of life and place it in the practical or pragmatic
department of ethics, that is to say the department
of morals which deals with the business of life. For my own part, and I have authority to support
me, I hold that the material of rhetoric is composed of
everything that may be placed before it as a subject
for speech. Plato, if I read him aright, makes
Socrates say to Gorgias that its material is to be found in things not words; while in the Phaedrus
he clearly proves that rhetoric is concerned not
merely with law-courts and public assemblies, but with
private and domestic affairs as well from which it is
obvious that this was the view of Plato himself. Cicero
also in a passage of one of his works, states that
the material of rhetoric is composed of the things
which are brought before it, but makes certain restrictions as to the nature of these things. In
another passage, however, he expresses his opinion
that the orator has to speak about all kinds of things;
I will quote his actual words And in another passage he says, But this material, as we call it, that is to say
the things brought before it, has been criticised by
some, at times on the ground that it is limitless, and
sometimes on the ground that it is not peculiar to
oratory, which they have therefore dubbed a discursive art, because all is grist that comes to its mill. I have no serious quarrel with these critics, for they
acknowledge that rhetoric is concerned with every
kind of material, though they deny that it has any
peculiar material just because of that material's multiplicity. But in spite of this multiplicity, rhetoric
is not unlimited in scope, and there are other minor arts whose material is characterised by the same
multiplicity such for instance is architecture, which
deals with everything that is useful for the purpose
of building such too is the engraver's art which
works on gold, silver, bronze, iron. As for sculpture,
its activity extends to wood, ivory, marble, glass and
precious stones in addition to the materials already
mentioned. And things which form the material for
other artists, do not for that reason cease forthwith
to be material for rhetoric. For if I ask what is the
material of the sculptor, I shall be told bronze; and
if I ask what is the material of the maker of vessels
I refer to the craft styled by the Greeks,
the answer will again be bronze and yet there is
all the difference in the world between vessels and
statues. Similarly medicine will not cease to be an
art, because, like the art of the gymnast, it prescribes rubbing with oil and exercise, or because it
deals with diet like the art of cookery. Again, the
objection that to discourse of what is good, expedient
or just is the duty of philosophy presents no difficulty. For when such critics speak of a philosopher,
they mean a good man. Why then should I feel
surprised to find that the orator whom I identify with
the good man deals with the same material There
is all the less reason, since I have already shown in
the first book that philosophers only usurped this
department of knowledge after it had been abandoned by the orators it was always the peculiar
property of rhetoric and the philosophers are really
trespassers. Finally, since the discussion of whatever is brought before it is the task of dialectic,
which is really a concise form of oratory, why should
not this task be regarded as also being the appropriate material for continuous oratory There is a further objection made by certain
critics, who say I might answer this criticism in the words of Cicero,
in whom I find the following passage I however regard it as sufficient that an orator should not be actually ignorant
of the subject on which he has to speak. For he
cannot have a knowledge of all causes, and yet he
should be able to speak on all. On what then
will he speak On those which he has studied.
Similarly as regards the arts, he will study those
concerning which he has to speak, as occasion may
demand, and will speak on those which he has
studied. What thenI am askedwill not a builder
speak better on the subject of building and a musician on music Certainly, if the orator does not
know what is the question at issue. Even an illiterate peasant who is a party to a suit will speak
better on behalf of his case than an orator who does
not know what the subject in dispute may be. But
on the other hand if the orator receive instruction
from the builder or the musician, he will put forward what he has thus learned better than either,
just as he will plead a case better than his client,
once he has been instructed in it. The builder and
the musician will, however, speak on the subject of
their respective arts, if there should be any technical
point which requires to be established. Neither will
be an orator, but he will perform his task like an
orator, just as when an untrained person binds up a wound, he will not be a physician, but he will be
acting as one. Is it suggested that such topics
never crop up in panegyric, deliberative or forensic
oratory When the question of the construction of
a port at Ostia came up for discussion, had not the
orator to state his views And yet it was a subject
requiring the technical knowledge of the architect. Does not the orator discuss the question whether
livid spots and swellings on the body are symptomatic of ill-health or poison And yet that is a
question for the qualified physician. Will he not
deal with measurements and figures And yet we
must admit that they form part of mathematics. For
my part I hold that practically all subjects are
under certain circumstances liable to come up for
treatment by the orator. If the circumstances do
not occur, the subjects will not concern him. We were therefore right in asserting that the
material of rhetoric is composed of everything that
comes before the orator for treatment, an assertion
which is confirmed by the practice of everyday
speech. For when we have been given a subject
on which to speak, we often preface our remarks by
calling attention to the fact that the matter has
been laid before us. Gorgias indeed felt so strongly
that it was the orator's duty to speak on every subject, that he used to allow those who attended his
lectures to ask him questions on any subject they
pleased. Hermagoras also asserted that the material
of oratory lay in the cause and the questions it
involved, thereby including every subject that can
be brought before it. If he denies that general
questions are the concern of oratory, he disagrees
with me but if they do concern rhetoric, that supports my contention. For there is nothing which
may not crop up in a cause or appear as a question
for discussion. Aristotle himself also by his tripartite
division of oratory, into forensic, deliberative and
demonstrative, practically brought everything into the
orator's domain, since there is nothing that may not
come up for treatment by one of these three kinds of
rhetoric. A very few critics have raised the question as to
what may be the instrument of oratory. My definition of an instrument is that without which the material
cannot be brought into the shape necessary for the effecting of our object. But it is not the art which requires an instrument, but the artist. Knowledge
needs no instruments, for it may be complete
although it produces nothing, but the artist must
have them. The engraver cannot work without his
chisel nor the painter without his brush. I shall
therefore defer this question until I come to treat of
the orator as distinct from his art. div1