The next subject which I was going to discuss
was the peroration which some call the completion
and others the conclusion. There are two kinds of
peroration, for it may deal either with facts or with
the emotional aspect of the case. The repetition
and grouping of the facts, which the Greeks call and some of our own writers call the
enumeration, serves both to refresh the memory of
the judge and to place the whole of the case before
his eyes, and, even although the facts may have
made little impression on him in detail, their cumulative effect is considerable. This final recapitulation must be as brief as possible and, as the
Greek term indicates, we must summarise the facts
under the appropriate heads. For if we devote
too much time thereto, the peroration will cease
to be an enumeration and will constitute something very like a second speech. On the other
hand the points selected for enumeration must
be treated with weight and dignity, enlivened
by apt reflexions and diversified by suitable figures;
for there is nothing more tiresome than a dry repetition of facts, which merely suggests a lack of
confidence in the judges' memory. There are however innumerable ways in which this may be done.
The finest example is provided by Cicero's prosecution of Verres. Then follows the enumeration. Another admirable example may be found
in the same speech where the enumeration of the
temples which the praetor had despoiled takes the
form of invoking the various deities concerned. We
may also at times pretend to be in doubt whether
we have not omitted something and to wonder what
the accused will say in reply to certain points or
what hope tile accuser can have after the manner in
which we have refuted all the charges brought against
us. But the most attractive form of peroration is
that which we may use when we have an opportunity of drawing some argument from our opponent's
speech, as for instance when we say or or But I must refrain from dealing with the various methods individually, for fear
that the instances that I produce should be regarded
as exhaustive, whereas our opportunities spring from
the nature of the particular case, from the statements
of our opponents and also from fortuitous circumstances. Nor must we restrict ourselves to recapitulating the points of our own speech, but must call
upon our opponent to reply to certain questions.
This however is only possible if there is time for him
to do so and if the arguments which we have put
forward are such as not to admit of refutation. For
to challenge points which tell in our opponent's
favour is not to argue against him, but to play the
part of prompter to him. The majority of Athenians
and almost all philosophers who have left anything
in writing on the art of oratory have held that the
recapitulation is the sole form of peroration. I imagine that the reason why the Athenians did so
was that appeals to the emotions were forbidden to
Athenian orators, a proclamation to this effect being
actually made by the court-usher. I am less surprised at the philosophers taking this view, for they
regard susceptibility to emotion as a vice, and think
it immoral that the judge should be distracted from
the truth by an appeal to his emotions and that
it is unbecoming for a good man to make use of
vicious procedure to serve his ends. None the less
they must admit that appeals to emotion are necessary if there are no other means for securing the
victory of truth, justice and the public interest. It
is however admitted by all that recapitulation may
be profitably employed in other portions of the
speech as well, if the case is complicated and a
number of different arguments have been employed
in the defence; though no one will doubt but that
there are many cases, in which no recapitulation at
all is necessary at any point, assuming, that is, that
the cases are both brief and simple. This part of
the peroration is common both to the prosecution
and the defence. Both parties as a general rule may likewise employ the appeal to the emotions, but they will
appeal to different emotions and the defender will
employ such appeals with greater frequency and
fulness. For the accuser has to rouse the judge,
while the defender has to soften him. Still even
the accuser will sometimes make his audience weep
by the pity excited for the man whose wrongs he
seeks to avenge, while the defendant will at times
develop no small vehemence when he complains of
the injustice of the calumny or conspiracy of which he is the victim. It will therefore be best to treat
these duties separately as I have already said, they
are much the same in the peroration as in the
exordium, but are freer and wider in scope in the
former. For our attempts to sway the judges are
made more sparingly at the commencement of the
speech, when it is enough that such an attempt
should gain admittance and we have the whole
speech before us. On the other hand in the peroration we have to consider what the feelings of the
judge will be when he retires to consider his verdict,
for we shall have no further opportunity to say anything and cannot any longer reserve arguments to be
produced later. It is therefore the duty of both parties
to seek to win the judge's goodwill and to divert it
from their opponent, as also to excite or assuage his
emotions. And the following brief rule may be laid
down for the observation of both parties, that the
orator should display the full strength of his case
before the eyes of the judge, and, when he has made
up his mind what points in his case actually deserve
or may seem to deserve to excite envy, goodwill,
dislike or pity, should dwell on those points by which
he himself would be most moved were he trying the
case. But it will be safer to discuss these considerations in detail. The points likely to commend the accuser to the
judge have already been stated in my remarks on
the exordium. There are however certain things
which require fuller treatment in the peroration
than in the exordium, where it is sufficient merely to
outline them. This fuller treatment is specially
required if the accused be a man of violent, unpopular or dangerous character or if the condemnation of the accused is likely to cover the judges with
glory or his acquittal with disgrace. Calvus for
example in his speech against Vatinius makes an
admirable remark Cicero again in the Verrines
says that the ill-name acquired by the courts may
be effaced by the condemnation of Verres, a statement that comes under the head of the conciliatory
methods mentioned above. The appeal to tear also,
if it is necessary to employ it to produce a like effect,
occupies a more prominent place in the peroration
than in the exordium, but I have expressed my views
on this subject in an earlier book. The peroration
also provides freer opportunities for exciting the
passions of jealousy, hatred or anger. As regards the
circumstances likely to excite such feelings in the
judge, jealousy will be produced by the influence of
the accused, hatred by the disgraceful nature of his
conduct, and anger by his disrespectful attitude to
the court, if, for instance, he be contumacious,
arrogant or studiously indifferent such anger may be
aroused not merely by specific acts or words, but by
his looks, bearing and manner. In this connexion
the remark made by the accuser of Cossutianus
Capito in my young days was regarded with great
approval the words used were Greek, but may be
translated thus
The best way however for the accuser to excite the
feelings of the judge is to make the charge which he
brings against the accused seem as atrocious or, if
feasible, as deplorable as possible. Its atrocity may
be enhanced by considerations of the nature of
the act, the position of its author or the victim, the purpose, time, place and manner of the act all of
which may be treated with infinite variety. Suppose
that we are complaining that our client has been
beaten. We must first speak of the act itself; we
shall then proceed to point out that the victim was
an old man, a child, a magistrate, an honest man or
a benefactor to the state; we shall also point out
that the assailant was a worthless and contemptible
fellow, or to take the opposite case was in a
position of excessive power or was the last man who
should have given the blow, or again that the
occasion was a solemn festival, or that the act was
committed at a time when such crimes were
punished with special severity by the courts or when
public order was at a dangerously low ebb. Again
the hatred excited by the act will be enhanced if it
was committed in the theatre, in a temple, or at
a public assembly, and if the blow was given not
in mistake or in a moment of passion or, if it
was the result of passion which was quite unjustifiable, being due to the fact that the victim
had gone to the assistance of his father or had
made some reply or was a candidate for the same
office as his assailant; or finally we may hint that
he wished to inflict more serious injury than he
succeeded in inflicting. But it is the manner of the
act that contributes most to the impression of its
atrocity, if, for example, the blow was violent or insulting thus Demosthenes seeks to excite hatred
against Midias by emphasising the position of the
blow, the attitude of the assailant and the expression
of his face. It is in this connexion that we shall
have to consider whether a man was killed by sword
or fire or poison, by one wound or several, and whether he was slain on the spot or tortured by
being kept in suspense. The accuser will also
frequently attempt to excite pity by complaining of
the fate of the man whom he is seeking to avenge or
of the desolation which has fallen upon his children
or parents. The judges may also be moved by drawing a picture of the future, of the fate which awaits
those who have complained of violence and wrong,
if they fail to secure justice. They must go into exile,
give up their property or endure to the end whatever their enemy may choose to inflict upon them.
But it will more frequently be the duty of the
accuser to divert the judge from all the temptations
to pity which the accused will place before him, and
to incite him to give a strong and dispassionate
verdict. It will also be his duty in this connexion
to forestall the arguments and actions to which his
opponent seems likely to have recourse. For it
makes the judge more cautious in observing the
sanctity of his oath and destroys the influence of
those who are going to reply to us when the arguments used by the defence have already been dealt
with by the prosecution, since they lose their novelty.
An instance of this will be found in the speech of
Messala against Aufidia, where he warns Servius
Sulpicius not to talk about the peril which
threatens the signatories to the document and the
defendant herself. Again Aesehines foretells the
line of defence which Demosthenes will pursue.
There are also occasions when the judges should be
told what answer they should make to requests on
behalf of the accused, a proceeding which is a form
of recapitulation. If we turn to the defendant, we must note that his worth, nis manly pursuits, the scars from wounds
received in battle, his rank and the services rendered
by his ancestors, will all commend him to the goodwill of the judges. Cicero, as I have already pointed
out, and Asinius both make use of this form of
appeal indeed they may almost be regarded as
rivals in this respect, since Cicero employed it when
defending the elder Scaurus, Asinius when defending the son. Again, the cause which has brought
the accused into peril may serve to produce the
same effect, if, for example, it appears that he has
incurred enmity on account of some honourable
action above all his goodness, humanity or pity
may be emphasised with this end in view. For it
adds to the apparent justice of his claim, if all that
he asks of the judge is that he should grant to him
what he himself has granted to others. We may
also in this connexion lay stress on the interests of
the state, the glory which will accrue to the judges,
the importance of the precedent which their verdict
will set and the place it will hold in the memory of
after generations. But the appeal which will carry
most weight is the appeal to pity, which not merely
forces the judge to change his views, but even to
betray his emotion by tears. Such appeals to pity
will be based either on the previous or present
sufferings of the accused, or on those which await
him if condemned. And the force of our appeal will
be doubled if we contrast the fortune which he now
enjoys with that to which he will be reduced, if he
fail. In this connexion great play may be made by
reference to the age and sex of the accused, or to
his nearest and dearest, that is, his children, parents
and kindred, all of which topics are treated in different ways. Sometimes the advocate himself may
even assume the role of close intimacy with his
client, as Cicero does in the pro Milone, where he
cries Such a method is
especially serviceable when, as was the case with
Milo, entreaty is not in keeping with the character
of the accused. Who would have endured to hear
Milo pleading for his life, when he admitted that
he had killed a man of noble birth because it was
his duty to do so Consequently Cicero sought to
win the judges' goodwill for Milo by emphasising
the staunchness of his character, and himself assumed
the role of suppliant. Impersonation may also be employed with profit
in such passages, and by impersonations I mean
fictitious speeches supposed to be uttered, such as
an advocate puts into the mouth of his client. The
bare facts are no doubt moving in themselves; but
when we pretend that the persons concerned themselves are speaking, the personal note adds to the
emotional effect. For then the judge seems no
longer to be listening to a voice bewailing another's
ills, but to hear the voice and feelings of the unhappy
victims, men whose appearance alone would call
forth his tears even though they uttered never a
word. And as their plea would awaken yet greater
pity if they urged it with their own lips, so it is
rendered to some extent all the more effective when
it is, as it were, put into their mouth by their
advocate we may draw a parallel from the stage, where the actor's voice and delivery produce greater
emotional effect when he is speaking in an assumed
role than when he speaks in his own character.
Consequently Cicero, to quote him once again,
although he will not put entreaties into Milo's
mouth, and prefers to commend him by his staunchness of character, still lends him words in the form
of such complaint as may become a brave man. he says, Appeals to pity should, however, always be brief,
and there is good reason for the saying that nothing
dries so quickly as tears. Time assuages even
genuine grief, and it is therefore inevitable that the
semblance of grief portrayed in our speech should
vanish yet more rapidly. And if we spend too much
time over such portrayal our hearer grows weary of
his tears, takes a breathing space, and returns once
more to the rational attitude from which lie has
been distracted by the impulse of the moment. We
must not, therefore, allow the effect which we have
produced to fall flat, and must consequently abandon
our appeal to the emotion just when that emotion
is at its height, nor must we expect anyone to
weep for long over another's ills. For this reason
our eloquence ought to be pitched higher in this
portion of our speech than in any other, since,
wherever it fails to add something to what has preceded, it seems even to diminish its previous effect,
while a diminuendo is merely a step towards the
rapid disappearance of the emotion. Actions as well as words may be employed to
move the court to tears. Hence the custom of bringing accused persons into court wearing squalid
and unkempt attire, and of introducing their children
and parents, and it is with this in view that we see
blood-stained swords, fragments of bone taken from
the wound, and garments spotted with blood, displayed by the accusers, wounds stripped of their
dressings, and scourged bodies bared to view. The
impression produced by such exhibitions is generally
enormous, since they seem to bring the spectators
face to face with the cruel facts. For example, the
sight of the bloodstains on the purple-bordered toga
of Gaius Caesar, which was carried at the head of
his funeral procession, aroused the Roman people to
fury. They knew that he had been killed; they
had even seen his body stretched upon the bier
but his garment, still wet with his blood, brought
such a vivid image of the crime before their minds,
that Caesar seemed not to have been murdered, but
to be being murdered before their very eyes. Still I
would not for this reason go so far as to approve a
practice of which I have read, and which indeed I
have occasionally witnessed, of bringing into court
a picture of the crime painted on wood or canvas,
that the judge might be stirred to fury by the
horror of the sight. For the pleader who prefers
a voiceless picture to speak for him in place of his
own eloquence must be singularly incompetent. On
the other hand, I know that the wearing of mourning and the presentation of an unkempt appearance,
and the introduction of relatives similarly arrayed,
has proved of value, and that entreaties have been
of great service to save the accused from condemnation. The practice therefore of appealing to the
judges by all that is near and dear to them will be of great service to the accused, especially if he, too,
has children, a wife and parents. Invocation of the
gods, again, usually gives the impression that the
speaker is conscious of the justice of his cause, while
it may produce a good effect if the accused throws
himself on the ground and embraces the knees of
the judges, unless his character, his past life and
station prohibit a resort to this device for there are
some acts which require to be defended with no less
boldness than was required for their commission. But
we must take care not to carry matters with too
high a hand, for fear of creating a bad impression
by an appearance of over-confidence. The most
effective of all such methods was in times past that
by which more than anything else Cicero is considered to have saved Lucius Murena from the
attacks of his accusers, who were men of the greatest
distinction. For he persuaded the court that nothing
was more necessary in view of the critical position
of affairs than that Murena should assume the consulship on the thirty-first of December. This form of
appeal is now, however, almost entirely obsolete,
since the safety of the state is to-day dependent on
the watchful care of a single ruler, and cannot conceivably be imperilled by the result of a trial. I have spoken of accusers and accused because it
is in situations involving danger that the emotional
appeal is most serviceable. But private cases also
admit of both kinds of peroration, namely, that which
consists in the recapitulation of the proofs and that
which takes the form of an appeal for pity, the
latter being employed when the position or reputation of the litigant seems to be in danger. For to embark on such tragic methods in trivial cases would
be like putting the mask and buskins of Hercules
on a small child. It is also worth while pointing out that, in my
opinion, the manner in which the client whose
sorrows we parade before the court conforms his
behaviour to the methods of his advocate is of the
utmost importance. For sometimes our appeal falls
flat owing to the ignorance, rusticity, indifference or
uncouthness of our client, and it is consequently
most important that the advocate should take all
necessary precautions in this connexion. I have
often seen clients whose behaviour was wholly out
of keeping with the line adopted by their counsel,
since their expression showed not the slightest
emotion, while they displayed a most unseasonable
cheerfulness and even aroused laughter by their
looks or actions; such incongruity is especially frequent when the appeal is of a theatrical character.
On one occasion an advocate produced a girl alleged
to be the sister of the opposing party for it was on
this point that the dispute turned and led her
across to the benches occupied by his opponents as
though to leave her in the arms of her brother I however had given tile brother timely warning and he had
left his seat. The advocate, although as a rule an
eloquent speaker, was struck dumb by the unexpected
turn of events and took his little girl back again in
the tamest possible manner. There was another
advocate who was defending a woman who thought
to secure a great effect by producing the portrait of
her husband, but sent the court into repeated
peals of laughter. For the persons entrusted with
the duty of handing in the portrait had no idea of the nature of a peroration and displayed it whenever the advocate looked their way, and when at last
it was produced at the proper moment it destroyed
all the good effect of his previous eloquence by its
hideousness, for it was a wax cast taken from an old
man's corpse. We are also familiar with the story
of what happened to Glycon, nicknamed Spiridion.
He asked a boy whom he produced in court why he
was crying; to which the boy replied, that his
paedagogus was pinching him. But the most effective
warning as to the perils which beset the peroration
is the story told by Cicero about the Caepasii.
But all these perils may be boldly faced by those
who have no difficulty in changing their line of
pleading. Those however who cannot get away
from what they have written, are reduced to silence
by such emergencies or else led into making false
statements, as for instance if an advocate should say, or or although the person in question is doing
none of these things. Such faults are due to the
practice of the schools, where we are free to feign
what we will with impunity, because we are at
liberty to invent facts. But this is impossible when
we are confronted with realities, and it was an
excellent remark that Cassius made to a young
orator who said, To which he replied, And he fixed his eyes on him with
the most ferocious scowl that he could muster.
There is one point which it is specially important to remember, that we should never attempt to move our
audience to tears without drawing on all the resources
of our eloquence. For while this form of emotional
appeal is the most effective of all, when successful,
its failure results in anti-climax, and if the pleader is
a feeble speaker he would have been wiser to leave
the pathos of the situation to the imagination of the
judges. For look and voice and even the expression
on the face of the accused to which the attention of
the court is drawn will generally awaken laughter
where they fail to awaken compassion. Therefore
the pleader must measure and make a careful
estimate of his powers, and must have a just comprehension of the difficulty of the task which he
contemplates. For there is no halfway house in such
matters between tears and laughter. The task of the peroration is not however confined
to exciting pity in the judges it may also be required to dispel the pity which they feel, either by
a set speech designed to recall them from their tears
to a consideration of the justice of the case, or by a
few witticisms such as, or the remark made by counsel
to a corpulent client, whose opponent, a mere child,
had been carried round the court by his advocate, Such
jests should not however descend to buffoonery.
Consequently I cannot give my approval to the
orator, although he was one of the most distinguished speakers of his day, who, when his opponent
brought in some children to enhance the effect of
his peroration, threw some dice among them, with
the result that they began to scramble for them.
For their childish ignorance of the perils with which they were threatened might in itself have awakened
compassion. For the same reason I cannot commend
the advocate who, when his opponent the accuser
produced a bloodstained sword in court, fled suddenly
from the benches as though in an agony of terror,
and then, when his turn came to plead, peeped out
of the crowd with his head half covered by his robe
and asked whether the man with the sword had
gone away. For though he caused a laugh, he made
himself ridiculous. Still, theatrical effects of the
kind we are discussing can be dispelled by the
power of eloquence. Cicero provides most admirable
examples of the way in which this may be done both
in the pro Rabirio where he attacks the production
in court of the portrait of Saturninus in the most
dignified language, and in the pro Vareno where he
launches a number of witticisms against a youth
whose wound had been unbound at intervals in the
course of the trial. There are also milder kinds of peroration in which,
if our opponent is of such a character that he deserves to be treated with respect, we strive to
ingratiate ourselves with him or give him some
friendly warning or urge him to regard us as his
friends. This method was admirably employed by
Passienus when he pleaded in a suit brought by his
wife Domitia against her brother Ahenobarbus for
the recovery of a sum of money he began by
making a number of remarks about the relationship
of the two parties and then, referring to their
wealth, which was in both cases enormous, added, All these appeals to emotion, although some hold that they should be confined to the exordium and
the peroration, which are, I admit, the places where
they are most often used, may be employed in other
portions of the speech as well, but more briefly, since
most of them must be reserved for the opening or
the close. But it is in tile peroration, if anywhere,
that we must let loose the whole torrent of our
eloquence. For, if we have spoken well in the rest
of our speech, we shall now have the judges on our
side, and shall be in a position, now that we have
emerged from the reefs and shoals, to spread all our
canvas, while since the chief task of the peroration
consists of amplification, we may legitimately make
free use of words and reflexions that are magnificent
and ornate. It is at the close of our drama that we
must really stir the theatre, when we have reached
the place for the phrase with which the old tragedies
and comedies used to end, In other portions of the speech we must appeal
to the emotions as occasion may arise. For it would
clearly be wrong to set forth facts calling for horror
and pity without any such appeal, while, if the
question arises as to the quality of any fact, such
an appeal may justifiably be subjoined to the proofs
of the fact in question. When we are pleading a
complicated case which is really made up of several
cases, it will be necessary to introduce a number of
passages resembling perorations, as Cicero does in
the Vetrines, where he laments over Philodamus, the
ships' captains, the crucifixion of the Roman citizen,
and a number of other tragic incidents. Some call
these by which they mean a peroration distributed among different portions of a speech. I should regard them rather as species than as parts
of the peroration, since the terms epilogue and
peroration both clearly indicate that they form the
conclusion of a speech. II. The peroration is the most important part of
forensic pleading, and in the main consists of appeals
to the emotions, concerning which I have consequently been forced to say something. But I
have not yet been able to give the topic specific
consideration as a whole, nor should I have been
justified in doing so. We have still, therefore,
to discuss a task which forms tile most powerful
means of obtaining what we desire, and is also
more difficult than any of those which we have
previously considered, namely that of stirring the
emotions of the judges, and of moulding and
transforming them to the attitude which we
desire. The few remarks which I have already
made on this subject were only such as were
essential to my theme, while my purpose was rather
to show what ought to be done than to set forth the
manner in which we can secure our aim. I must
now review the whole subject in a more exhaustive
fashion. There is scope for an appeal to the emotions, as
I have already said,1 in every portion of a speech.
Moreover these emotions present great variety, and
demand more than cursory treatment, since it is in
their handling that the power of oratory shews itself
at its highest. Even a slight and limited talent may,
with the assistance of practice or learning, perhaps
succeed in giving life to other departments of oratory,
and in developing them to a serviceable extent. At
any rate there are, and have always been, a considerable number of pleaders capable of discovering
arguments adequate to prove their points. I am far
from despising such, but I consider that their utility
is restricted to providing the judge with such facts
as it is necessary for him to know, and, to be quite
frank, I regard them merely as suitable persons to
instruct pleaders of real eloquence in the facts of
a case. But few indeed are those orators who can
sweep the judge with them, lead him to adopt
that attitude of mind which they desire, and compel
him to weep with them or share their anger. And
yet it is this emotional power that dominates
the court, it is this form of eloquence that is the
queen of all. For as a rule arguments arise out of
the case itself, and the better cause has always the
larger number to support it, so that the party who
wills by means of them will have no further satisfaction than that of knowing that his advocate did not
fail him. But the peculiar task of the orator arises
when the minds of the judges require force to move
them, and their thoughts have actually to be led away
from the contemplation of the truth. No instruction
from the litigant can secure this, nor can such power
be acquired merely by the study of a brief. Proofs, it
is true, may induce the judges to regard our case
as superior to that of our opponent, but the appeal
to the emotions will do more, for it will make them
wish our case to be the better. And what they
wish, they will also believe. For as soon as they
begin to be angry, to feel favourably disposed, to
hate or pity, they begin to take a personal interest
in the case, and just as lovers are incapable of
forming a reasoned judgment on the beauty of the
object of their affections, because passion forestalls the sense of sight, so the judge, when overcome by
his emotions, abandons all attempt to enquire into
the truth of the arguments, is swept along by the
tide of passion, and yields himself unquestioning to
the torrent. Thus the verdict of the court shows
how much weight has been carried by the arguments
and the evidence; but when the judge has been
really moved by the orator he reveals his feelings
while he is still sitting and listening to the case.
When those tears, which are the aim of most perorations, well forth from his eyes, is he not giving his
verdict for all to see It is to this, therefore, that
the orator must devote all his powers, Without this all else is bare and meagre, weak and
devoid of charm. For it is in its power over the
emotions that the life and soul of oratory is to be
found. Emotions however, as we learn from ancient
authorities, fall into two classes; the one is called
pathos by the Greeks and is rightly and correctly expressed in Latin by adfectus emotion the other is
called ethos, a word for which in my opinion Latin has
no equivalent it is however rendered by mores morals
and consequently the branch of philosophy known as
ethics is styled moral philosophy by us. But close
consideration of the nature of the subject leads me
to think that in this connexion it is not so much
morals in general that is meant as certain peculiar
aspects; for the term morals includes every attitude
of the mind. The more cautious writers have preferred to give the sense of the term rather than to
translate it into Latin. They therefore explain pathos as describing the more violent emotions and ethos as
designating those which are calm and gentle in the
one case the passions are violent, in the other subdued, the former command and disturb, the latter
persuade and induce a feeling of goodwill. Some
add that ethos is continuous, while pathos is momentary. While admitting that this is usually the ease,
I still hold that there are some subjects which
demand that the more violent emotion should be
continuous. But, although the gentler emotions
require less force and impetus, they call for no less
art and experience than the more vehement, and are
demanded in a greater number of cases, indeed in a
certain sense they are required in all. For as everything treated by the orator may be regarded from
the ethical standpoint, we may apply the word ethos
whenever he speaks of what is honourable and expedient or of what ought or ought not to be done.
Some regard commendation and excuse as the peculiar spheres of ethos, but while I admit that they do
fall within its sphere, I do not regard them as being
alone in so doing. Indeed I would add that pathos
and ethos are sometimes of the same nature, differing
only in degree; love for instance comes under the
head of pathos, affection of ethos; sometimes however
they differ, a distinction which is important for the
peroration, since ethos is generally employed to calm
the storm aroused by pathos. I ought however to
explain what is meant by ethos in greater detail,
since the term is not in itself sufficiently expressive
of its meaning. The ethos which I have in my mind
and which I desiderate in an orator is commended
to our approval by goodness more than aught else
and is not merely calm and mild, but in most cases ingratiating and courteous and such as to excite
pleasure and affection in our hearers, while the chief
merit in its expression lies in making it seem that
all that we say derives directly from the nature of
the facts and persons concerned and in the revelation of the character of the orator in such a way that
all may recognise it. This kind of ethos should be
especially displayed in cases where the persons concerned are intimately connected, whenever we
tolerate or pardon any act or offer satisfaction or
admonition, in all of which cases there should be no
trace of anger or hatred. On the other hand the
moderation shown by a father to his son, a guardian
to his ward or a husband to his wife will differ from
that which is shown by an old man to a youthful
stranger who has insulted him or by a man of high
rank to his inferior, since in the former cases they
emphasise their affection for the wrongdoer and
there is no desire to do anything that will excite
dislike against them save by the manifestation of
the fact that they still love them; while in the one
case the offended party should be no more than provoked, in the other he should he really deeply moved.
Of the same character, though less violent, is the
emotion to be shown when we ask pardon for the
errors of the young, or apologise for some youthful
amour. Sometimes again gentle raillery of another's
passion may derive its tone from ethos, though only
to a partial extent. More closely dependent on ethos
are the skilful exercise of feigned emotion or the
employment of irony in making apologies or asking
questions, irony being the term which is applied to
words which mean something other than they seem
to express. From the same source springs also that more powerful method of exciting hatred, when by
a feigned submission to our opponents we pass silent
censure on their violence. For the very fact of our
yielding serves to demonstrate their insupportable
arrogance, while orators who have a passion for abuse
or are given to affect freedom of speech fail to realise
that it is a far more effective course to make your
antagonist unpopular than to abuse him. For the
former course makes our antagonists disliked, the
latter ourselves. The emotion of love and longing
for our friends and connexions is perhaps of an intermediate character, being stronger than ethos and
weaker than pathos. There is also good reason for
giving the name of ethos to those scholastic exercises
in which we portray rustics, misers, cowards and
superstitious persons according as our theme may
require. For if ethos denotes moral character, our
speech must necessarily be based on ethos when it is
engaged in portraying such character. Finally ethos in all its forms requires the speaker to
be a man of good character and courtesy. For it is
most important that he should himself possess or be
thought to possess those virtues for the possession of
which it is his duty, if possible, to commend his client
as well, while the excellence of his own character
will make his pleading all the more convincing and
will be of the utmost service to the cases which he
undertakes. For the orator who gives the impression of being a bad man while he is speaking, is
actually speaking badly, since his words seem to be
insincere owing to the absence of ethos which would
otherwise have revealed itself. Consequently the
style of oratory employed in such cases should be
calm and mild with no trace of pride, elevation or sublimity, all of which would be out of place. It is
enough to speak appropriately, pleasantly and persuasively, and therefore the intermediate style of
oratory is most suitable. The pathos of the Greeks, which we correctly
translate by emotion, is of a different character, and
I cannot better indicate the nature of the difference
than by saying that ethos rather resembles comedy
and pathos tragedy. For pathos is almost entirely
concerned with anger, dislike, fear, hatred and pity.
It will be obvious to all what topics are appropriate
to such appeals and I have already spoken on the
subject in discussing the exordium and the peroration. I wish however to point out that fear is of
two kinds, that which we feel and that which we
cause in others. Similarly there are two kinds of
invidia hatred, envy, to which the two adjectives
invidus envious and invidious invidious, hateful
correspond. The first supplies an epithet for persons,
the second for things, and it is in this latter connexion that the orator's task is even more onerous.
For though some things are hateful in themselves
such as parricide, murder, poisoning, other things
have to be made to seem hateful. This latter contingency arises when we attempt to shew that what
we have suffered is of a more horrible nature than
what are usually regarded as great evils. Vergil will
provide an example in the lines For how wretched was the lot of Andromache, if
Polyxena be accounted happy in comparison with her Again the same problem arises when we endeavour to magnify our wrongs by saying that other
far lesser ills are intolerable; e.g. However I will deal with this subject more fully
when I come to speak of amplification. Meanwhile
I will content myself with the observation that the
aim of appeals to the emotion is not merely to slew
the bitter and grievous nature of ills that actually
are so, but also to make ills which are usually regarded as tolerable seem unendurable, as for instance
when we represent insulting words as inflicting more
grievous injury than an actual blow or represent
disgrace as being worse than death. For the force
of eloquence is such that it not merely compels the
judge to the conclusion toward which the nature of
the facts lead him, but awakens emotions which
either do not naturally arise from the case or are
stronger than the case would suggest. This is known
as deriosis, that is to say, language giving additional
force to things unjust, cruel or hateful, an accomplishment in which Demosthenes created immense
and special effect. If I thought it sufficient to follow traditional rules,
I should regard it as adequate treatment for this
topic to omit nothing that I have read or been
taught, provided that it be reasonably sound. But
my design is to bring to light the secret principles
of this art, and to open up the inmost recesses of
the subject, giving the result not of teaching received from others, but of my own experience and
the guidance of nature herself. The prime essential
for stirring the emotions of others is, in my opinion, first to feel those emotions oneself. It is sometimes
positively ridiculous to counterfeit grief, anger and
indignation, if we content ourselves with accommodating our words and looks and make no attempt
to adapt our own feelings to the emotions to be
expressed. What other reason is there for the
eloquence with which mourners express their grief;
or for the fluency which anger lends even to the
uneducated, save the fact that their minds are
stirred to power by the depth and sincerity of their
feelings Consequently, if we wish to give our
words the appearance of sincerity, we must assimilate
ourselves to the emotions of those who are genuinely
so affected, and our eloquence must spring from the
same feeling that we desire to produce in the mind
of the judge. Will he grieve who can find no trace
of grief in the words with which I seek to move
him to grief Will he be angry, if the orator who
seeks to kindle his anger shows no sign of labouring
under the emotion which he demands from his
audience Will he shed tears if the pleader's eyes
are dry It is utterly impossible. Fire alone can
kindle, and moisture alone can wet, nor can one
thing impart any colour to another save that which
it possesses itself. Accordingly, the first essential
is that those feelings should prevail with us that
we wish to prevail with the judge, and that we
should be moved ourselves before we attempt to
move others. But how are we to generate these
emotions in ourselves, since emotion is not in our
own power I will try to explain as best I may. There
are certain experiences which the Greeks call and the Romans visions, whereby things absent
are presented to our imagination with such extreme vividness that they seem actually to be before
our very eyes. It is the man who is really sensitive to such impressions who will have the greatest
power over the emotions. Some writers describe
the possessor of this power of vivid imagination,
whereby things, words and actions are presented
in the most realistic manner, by the Greek word and it is a power which all may
readily acquire if they will. When the mind is unoccupied or is absorbed by fantastic hopes or daydreams, we are haunted by these visions of which
I am speaking to such an extent that we imagine
that we are travelling abroad, crossing the sea, fighting, addressing the people, or enjoying the use of
wealth that we do not actually possess, and seem
to ourselves not to be dreaming but acting. Surely,
then, it may be possible to turn this form of hallucination to some profit. I am complaining that a man
has been murdered. Shall I not bring before my
eyes all the circumstances which it is reasonable to
imagine must have occurred in such a connexion
Shall I not see the assassin burst suddenly from his
hiding-place, the victim tremble, cry for help, beg
for mercy, or turn to run Shall I not see the fatal
blow delivered and the stricken body fall Will
not the blood, the deathly pallor, the groan of
agony, the death-rattle, be indelibly impressed upon
my mind From such impressions arises that which
Cicero calls illumination and actuality, which makes
us seem not so much to narrate as to exhibit the
actual scene, while our emotions will be no less
actively stirred than if we were present at the actual occurrence. Is it not from visions such as these that
Vergil was inspired to write Or, or the description of the horse at the funeral of
Pallas,  And how vivid
was the image of death conceived by the poet when
he wrote- 
Again, when we desire to awaken pity, we must
actually believe that the ills of which we complain
have befallen our own selves, and must persuade
our minds that this is really the case. We must
identify ourselves with the persons of whom we
complain that they have suffered grievous, unmerited
and bitter misfortune, and must plead their case and
for a brief space feel their suffering as though it
were our own, while our words must be such as we
should use if we stood in their shoes. I have often
seen actors, both in tragedy and comedy, leave the
theatre still drowned in tears after concluding the
performance of some moving role. But if the mere
delivery of words written by another has the power
to set our souls on fire with fictitious emotions, what
will the orator do whose duty it is to picture to
himself the facts and who has it in his power to feel
the same emotion as his client whose interests are
at stakeEven in the schools it is desirable that
the student should be moved by his theme, and
should imagine it to be true; indeed, it is all the
more desirable then, since, as a rule in scholastic declamations, the speaker more often appears as the
actual litigant than as his advocate. Suppose we are
impersonating an orphan, a shipwrecked man, or one
in grave peril. What profit is there in assuming
such a rle unless we also assume the emotions
which it involves I have thought it necessary not
to conceal these considerations from my reader, since
they have contributed to the acquisition of such
reputation for talent as I possess or once possessed.
I have frequently been so much moved while speaking, that I have not merely been wrought upon to
tears, but have turned pale and shown all the
symptoms of genuine grief. 