The syllogistic basis has some resemblance
to the basis concerned with the letter and intention of
the law, since whenever it comes into play, one party
rests his case on the letter there is, however, this
difference between the two bases, that in the latter
we argue against the letter, in the present beyond
the letter, while in the latter the party defending
the letter aims at securing that in any case the letter
may be carried into effect, whereas in the present his
aim will be to prevent anything except the letter
being carried into effect. The syllogism is sometimes
employed in conjunction with definition for often if
the definition be weak it takes refuge in the syllogism.
Assume a law to run as follows The strongest
line for the accuser to take will be to assert that
the love-potion was a poison. This involves definition.
If it proves weak, we shall have recourse to the
syllogism, to which we shall proceed after virtually dropping our previous argument, and which we shall
employ to decide the question whether she does not
deserve to be punished for administering the lovepotion no less than if she had caused her husband's
death by poison. The syllogistic basis, then, deduces from the letter
of the law that which is uncertain; and since this
conclusion is arrived at by reason, the basis is called
ratiocinative. It may be subdivided into the following species of question. If it is right to do a thing
once, is it right to do it often Example If the law
grants a privilege with reference to one thing, does
it grant it with reference to a number Example If a thing is legal before a certain
occurrence, is it legal after it Example Is that which is lawful
with regard to the whole, lawful with regard to a
part Example Is that
which is lawful with regard to a part, lawful with
regard to the whole Example In all these cases the syllogism rests on the letter of
the law as well for the accuser urges that the
provisions of the law are precise. He will say, or or and so on. But to this we may reply, Thus we infer what is doubtful
from what is certain. It is a more difficult task to
deduce from the letter of the law that which is not
actually prescribed by the letter, and to argue because
that is the case, so also is this. Take the following
problems. or Under this
heading come questions such as the following if
there is not a special law applicable to the case, ought
we to have recourse to an analogous law is the
point in question similar to what is contained in the
letter of the law Now it should be noted that what
is similar may be greater, equal or less. In the first
ease we enquire whether the provisions of the law
are sufficient, or, if they are insufficient, whether we
should have recourse to this other law. In both
cases it is a question of the intention of the legislator.
But the most effective form of treatment in such
cases will be to appeal to equity. 