Rhetoric is a Greek term which has been
translated into Latin by oratoria or oratrix. I would
not for the world deprive the translators of the
praise which is their due for attempting to increase
the vocabulary of our native tongue; but translations from Greek into Latin are not always satisfactory,
just as the attempt to represent Latin words
in a Greek dress is sometimes equally unsuccessful. And the translations in question are fully as
harsh as the essentia and queentia of Plautus,
and have not even the merit of being exact.
For oratoria is formed like elocutoria and oratrix
like elocutrix, whereas the rhetoric with which
we are concerned is rather to be identified with
eloquentia, and the word is undoubtedly used in two
senses by the Greeks. In the one case it is an
adjective i.e. ars rhetorica, the rhetorical art, like
piratic in the phrase nauis piratica, in the other it is
a noun like philosophy or friendship. It is as a substantive that we require it here; now the correct
translation of the Greek grammatice is litteratura not
litteratrix or litteratoria, which would be the forms
analogous to oratrix and oratoria. But in the case of there is no similar Latin equivalent. It is
best therefore not to quarrel about it, more especially
as we have to use Greek terms in many other cases.
For I may at least use the words philosophus, musicus
and geometres without outraging them by changing
them into clumsy Latin equivalents. Finally,
since Cicero gave a Greek title to the earlier works
which he wrote on this subject, I may without fear
of rashness accept the great orator as sufficient
authority for the name of the art which he professed. To resume, then, rhetoric for I shall now use the
name without fear of captious criticism is in my
opinion best treated under the three following heads,
the art, the artist and the work. The art is that
which we should acquire by study, and is the art of speaking well. The artist is he who has acquired the
art, that is to say, he is the orator whose task it is
to speak well. The work is the achievement of
the artist, namely good speaking. Each of these
three general divisions is in its turn divided into
species. Of the two latter divisions I shall speak
in their proper place. For the present I shall proceed to a discussion of the first. 