I would, therefore, have a father conceive the
highest hopes of his son from the moment of his
birth. If he does so, he will be more careful about
the groundwork of his education. For there is
absolutely no foundation for the complaint that but
few men have the power to take in the knowledge
that is imparted to them, and that the majority are
so slow of understanding that education is a waste
of time and labour. On the contrary you will find
that most are quick to reason and ready to learn.
Reasoning comes as naturally to man as flying to
birds, speed to horses and ferocity to beasts of prey our minds are endowed by nature with such activity
and sagacity that the soul is believed to proceed
from heaven. Those who are dull and unteachable
are as abnormal as prodigious births and monstrosities, and are but few in number. A proof of what
I say is to be found in the fact that boys commonly
show promise of many accomplishments, and when
such promise dies away as they grow up, this is
plainly due not to the failure of natural gifts, but to
lack of the requisite care. But, it will be urged,
there are degrees of talent. Undoubtedly, I reply,
and there will be a corresponding variation in actual
accomplishment but that there are any who gain
nothing from education, I absolutely deny. The
man who shares this conviction, must, as soon as he
becomes a father, devote the utmost care to fostering the promise shown by the son whom he destines
to become an orator. Above all see that the child's nurse speaks
correctly. The ideal, according to Chrysippus,
would be that she should be a philosopher failing
that he desired that the best should be chosen, as
far as possible. No doubt the most important point
is that they should be of good character but they
should speak correctly as well. It is the nurse that
the child first hears, and her words that he will first
attempt to imitate. And we are by nature most
tenacious of childish impressions, just as the flavour
first absorbed by vessels when new persists, and the
colour imparted by dyes to the primitive whiteness
of wool is indelible. Further it is the worst
impressions that are most durable. For, while what
is good readily deteriorates, you will never turn vice into virtue. Do not therefore allow the boy to
become accustomed even in infancy to a style of
speech which he will subsequently have to unlearn. As regards parents, I should like to see them as
highly educated as possible, and I do not restrict this
remark to fathers alone. We are told that the
eloquence of the Gracchi owed much to their
mother Cornelia, whose letters even to-day testify to
the cultivation of her style. Laelia, the daughter
of Gaius Laelius, is said to have reproduced the
elegance of her father's language in her own speech,
while the oration delivered before the triumvirs by
Hortensia, the daughter of Quintus Hortensius, is
still read and not merely as a compliment to her sex. And even those who have not had the fortune to
receive a good education should not for that reason
devote less care to their son's education; but should
on the contrary show all the greater diligence in
other matters where they can be of service to their
children. As regards the boys in whose company our budding
orator is to be brought up, I would repeat what
I have said about nurses. As regards his paedagogi,
I would urge that they should have had a thorough
education, or if they have not, that they should be
aware of the fact. There are none worse than
those, who as soon as they have progressed beyond
a knowledge of the alphabet delude themselves
into the belief that they are the possessors of real
knowledge. For they disdain to stoop to the
drudgery of teaching, and conceiving that they
have acquired a certain title to authoritya frequent
source of vanity in such personsbecome imperious
or even brutal in instilling a thorough dose of their own folly. Their misconduct is no less prejudicial
to morals. We are, for instance, told by Diogenes
of Babylon, that Leonides, Alexander's paedagogus,
infected his pupil with certain faults, which as a
result of his education as a boy clung to him even in
his maturer years when he had become the greatest
of kings. If any of my readers regards me as somewhat
exacting in my demands, I would ask him to reflect
that it is no easy task to create an orator, even
though his education be carried out under the most
favourable circumstances, and that further and
greater difficulties are still before us. For continuous application, the very best of teachers and
a variety of exercises are necessary. Therefore the
rules which we lay down for the education of our
pupil must be of the best. If anyone refuses to be
guided by them, the fault will lie not with the
method, but with the individual. Still if it should
prove impossible to secure the ideal nurse, the ideal
companions, or the ideal paedagogus, I would insist
that there should be one person at any rate attached
to the boy who has some knowledge of speaking
and who will, if any incorrect expression should be
used by nurse or paedagogus in the presence of
the child under their charge, at once correct the
error and prevent its becoming a habit. But it must
be clearly understood that this is only a remedy, and
that the ideal course is that indicated above. I prefer that a boy should begin with Greek,
because Latin, being in general use, will be picked
up by him whether we will or no; while the fact
that Latin learning is derived from Greek is a
further reason for his being first instructed in the latter. I do not however desire that this principle
should be so superstitiously observed that he should
for long speak and learn only Greek, as is done in the
majority of cases. Such a course gives rise to many
faults of language and accent; the latter tends to
acquire a foreign intonation, while the former
through force of habit becomes impregnated with
Greek idioms, which persist with extreme obstinacy
even when we are speaking another tongue. The
study of Latin ought therefore to follow at no great
distance and in a short time proceed side by side
with Greek. The result will be that, as soon as we
begin to give equal attention to both languages,
neither will prove a hindrance to the other. Some hold that boys should not be taught to
read till they are seven years old, that being the
earliest age at which they can derive profit from
instruction and endure the strain of learning. Most
of them attribute this view to Hesiod, at least such
as lived before the time of Aristophanes the grammarian, who was the first to deny that the Hypothecae, in which this opinion is expressed, was the
work of that poet. But other authorities, among
them Eratosthenes, give the same advice. Those
however who hold that a child's mind should not be
allowed to lie fallow for a moment are wiser.
Chrysippus, for instance, though he gives the nurses
a three years' reign, still holds the formation of
the child's mind on the best principles to be a part
of their duties. Why, again, since children are
capable of moral training, should they not be
capable of literary education I am well aware
that during the whole period of which I am speaking
we can expect scarcely the same amount of progress that one year will effect afterwards. Still those who
disagree with me seem in taking this line to spare
the teacher rather than the pupil. What better
occupation can a child have so soon as he is able to
speak And he must be kept occupied somehow or
other. Or why should we despise the profit to be
derived before the age of seven, small though it be
For though the knowledge absorbed in the previous
years may be but little, yet the boy will be learning
something more advanced during that year, in which
he would otherwise have been occupied with something more elementary. Such progress each successive year increases the total, and the time gained
during childhood is clear profit to the period of
youth. Further as regards the years which follow
I must emphasise the importance of learning what
has to be learnt in good time. Let us not therefore
waste the earliest years there is all the less excuse
for this, since the elements of literary training are
solely a question of memory, which not only exists
even in small children, but is specially retentive at
that age. I am not however so blind to differences of age
as to think that the very young should be forced on
prematurely or given real work to do. Above all
things we must take care that the child, who is not
yet old enough to love his studies, does not come to
hate them and dread the bitterness which he has
once tasted, even when the years of infancy are
left behind. His studies must be made an amusement he must be questioned and praised and
taught to rejoice when he has done well; sometimes
too, when he refuses instruction, it should be given
to some other to excite his envy, at times also he must be engaged in competition and should be
allowed to believe himself successful more often than
not, while he should be encouraged to do his best by
such rewards as may appeal to his tender years. These instructions may seem but trivialities in
view of the fact that I am professing to describe the
education of an orator. But studies, like men, have
their infancy, and as the training of the body which
is destined to grow to the fulness of strength begins
while the child is in his cradle and at his mother's
breast, so even the man who is destined to rise to
the heights of eloquence was once a squalling babe,
tried to speak in stammering accents and was
puzzled by the shapes of letters. Nor does the
fact that capacity for learning is inadequate, prove
that it is not necessary to learn anything. No
one blames a father because he thinks that such
details should on no account be neglected in the
case of his own son. Why then should he be criticised who sets down for the benefit of the public
what he would be right to put into practice in his
own house There is this further reason why he
should not be blamed. Small children are better
adapted for taking in small things, and just as the
body can only be trained to certain flexions of the
limbs while it is young and supple, so the acquisition
of strength makes the mind offer greater resistance
to the acquisition of most subjects of knowledge. Would Philip of Macedon have wished that his son
Alexander should be taught the rudiments of letters
by Aristotle, the greatest philosopher of that age, or
would the latter have undertaken the task, if he had
not thought that even the earliest instruction is best
given by the most perfect teacher and has real reference to the whole of education Let us assume
therefore that Alexander has been confided to our
charge and that the infant placed in our lap deserves
no less attention than hethough for that matter
every man's child deserves equal attention. Would
you be ashamed even in teaching him the alphabet
to point out some brief rules for his education At any rate I am not satisfied with the course
which I note is usually adopted of teaching small
children the names and order of the letters before
their shapes. Such a practice makes them slow
to recognise the letters, since they do not pay
attention to their actual shape, preferring to be
guided by what they have already learned by
rote. It is for this reason that teachers, when
they think they have sufficiently familiarised their
young pupils with the letters written in their
usual order, reverse that order or rearrange it in
every kind of combination, until they learn to know
the letters from their appearance and not from
the order in which they occur. It will be best
therefore for children to begin by learning their
appearance and names just as they do with men. The method, however, to which we have objected in
teaching the alphabet, is unobjectionable when
applied to syllables. I quite approve on the other
hand of a practice which has been devised to
stimulate children to learn by giving them ivory
letters to play with, as I do of anything else that
may be discovered to delight the very young, the
sight, handling and naming of which is a pleasure. As soon as the child has begun to know the
shapes of the various letters, it will be no bad thing
to have them cut as accurately as possible upon a board, so that the pen may be guided along the
grooves. Thus mistakes such as occur with wax
tablets will be rendered impossible; for the pen
will be confined between the edges of the letters
and will be prevented from going astray. Further
by increasing the frequency and speed with which
they follow these fixed outlines we shall give steadiness to the fingers, and there will be no need to
guide the child's hand with our own. The art of
writing well and quickly is not unimportant for our
purpose, though it is generally disregarded by persons
of quality. Writing is of the utmost importance
in the study which we have under consideration and
by its means alone can true and deeply rooted
proficiency be obtained. But a sluggish pen delays
our thoughts, while an unformed and illiterate hand
cannot be deciphered, a circumstance which necessitates another wearisome task, namely the dictation of what we have written to a copyist. We shall
therefore at all times and in all places, and above all
when we are writing private letters to our friends,
find a gratification in the thought that we have not
neglected even this accomplishment. As regards syllables, no short cut is possible they
must all be learnt, and there is no good in putting
off learning the most difficult; this is the general
practice, but the sole result is bad spelling. Further
we must beware of placing a blind confidence in a
child's memory. It is better to repeat syllables and
impress them on the memory and, when he is
reading, not to press him to read continuously or
with greater speed, unless indeed the clear and
obvious sequence of letters can suggest itself without
its being necessary for the child to stop to think. The syllables once learnt, let him begin to construct
words with them and sentences with the words. You will hardly believe how much reading is delayed
by undue haste. If the child attempts more than
his powers allow, the inevitable result is hesitation,
interruption and repetition, and the mistakes which
he makes merely lead him to lose confidence in what
he already knows. Reading must therefore first be
sure, then connected, while it must be kept slow for
a considerable time, until practice brings speed
unaccompanied by error. For to look to the right,
which is regularly taught, and to look ahead depends not so much on precept as on practice; since
it is necessary to keep the eyes on what follows
while reading out what precedes, with the resulting difficulty that the attention of the mind must
be divided, the eyes and voice being differently engaged. It will be found worth while, when the boy
begins to write out words in accordance with the
usual practice, to see that he does not waste his
labour in writing out common words of everyday
occurrence. He can readily learn the explanations
or glosses, as the Greeks call them, of the more
obscure words by the way and, while he is still engaged on the first rudiments, acquire what would
otherwise demand special time to be devoted to it.
And as we are still discussing minor details, I would
urge that the lines, which he is set to copy, should
not express thoughts of no significance, but convey
some sound moral lesson. He will remember such
aphorisms even when he is an old man, and the impression made upon his unformed mind will contribute
to the formation of his character. He may also be
entertained by learning the sayings of famous men and above all selections from the poets, poetry being
more attractive to children. For memory is most necessary to an orator, as I shall point out in its proper
place, and there is nothing like practice for strengthening and developing it. And at the tender age
of which we are now speaking, when originality is
impossible, memory is almost the only faculty which
can be developed by the teacher. It will be worth
while, by way of improving the child's pronunciation
and distinctness of utterance, to make him rattle
off a selection of names and lines of studied difficulty
they should be formed of a number of syllables
which go ill together and should be harsh and
rugged in sound the Greeks call them This sounds a trifling matter, but its omission will
result in numerous faults of pronunciation, which,
unless removed in early years, will become a perverse
and incurable habit and persist through life. 