All conjecture is concerned either with facts
or intention. Each of these may occur in one of
three times, past, present or future. Questions
concerning facts are either general or definite, that
is to say, those which involve consideration of
persons and those which do not. Concerning intentions there can be no questions which do not
involve some person and where the facts of the
case are not admitted. Therefore when the question
turns on some fact, the point on which doubt arises
is either what has been done, or what is being done,
or what is likely to be done. For example, in general
questions we discuss whether the universe has been
formed of a concourse of atoms, or is governed by providence, or is likely some day to come to an end.
In definite questions, on the other hand, we discuss whether Roscius has murdered his father,
whether Manlius is aiming at making himself king,
or Quintus Caecilius will be justified in appearing
as the accuser of Verres. In the law courts past
time is of most importance, since all accusations
are concerned with what has actually been done,
while what is being done or is likely to be done is
inferred from the past. We also enquire into origins.
For instance, we enquire whether a pestilence be
due to the anger of heaven, the inclement weather,
the pollution of the water-supply, or the noxious
vapours emitted by the earth. Again, we seek for
the motives of an act. For example, we enquire
whether the fifty kings who sailed against Troy did
so because they were bound by their oath, or were
moved to do so by righteous indignation, or merely
desired to gratify the sons of Atreus. There is no
very great difference between these two classes of
question. As regards facts falling within the present,
if they can be detected by the eye without any
reference to their logical antecedents being required,
there will be no need of conjecture let us suppose,
for instance, that the Lacedaemonians are enquiring
whether the Athenians are erecting fortifications.
But although conjecture may seem entirely foreign
to this class of question, there are cases in which it
it necessary, as in questions of personal identity,
which may be illustrated by the action brought
against the heirs of Urbinia, where the question
was whether the man who claimed the property as
being the son of the deceased, was Figulus or Sosipater. In this case the actual person was before the eyes of the court, so that there could be no question
whether he existed as there is, for instance, when
we ask whether there exists any land beyond the
Ocean nor what he was nor of what kind. The
question was simply, who he was. But this kind of
dispute also depends on past time. The problem is
whether this man Clusinius Figulus was born of
Urbinia. Such disputes have arisen even in our
own day, indeed I myself have pleaded in such.
On the other hand, conjecture as to intention is
obviously concerned with all three times. We ask
with what purpose Ligarius went to Africa, with
what purpose Pyrrhus is asking for a treaty, and
how Caesar will take it if Ptolemy kills Pompey. We may also employ conjecture to enquire into
quality in questions dealing with size, species and
number, such as whether the sun is greater than the
earth, whether the moon is spherical, flat or conical,
whether there is one universe or several, or, to go
outside these physical speculations, whether the
Trojan or the Peloponnesian war was the greatest,
what was the nature of the shield of Achilles, or
whether there was more than one Hercules. In forensic cases, however, which consist of
accusation and defence, there is one kind of conjecture by which we enquire both about an act
and about its author. This sometimes treats the two
questions together, as, for example, when both the
act and the identity of the author are denied, and
sometimes separately, as when the first enquiry,
whether the act was committed, is followed by a
second, where, the act being admitted, the question
is by whom it was committed. The act itself again
sometimes involves a single question, as, for example, whether a man is dead, and sometimes two, as, for
instance, whether he died of poison or of some internal
disease. Another form of conjecture is concerned
with the act alone, it being admitted that if the
act was really committed, there can be no doubt as
to its author. A third form is concerned solely with
the author, the act being admitted and the dispute
turning on the question as to who committed it.
This third form is complex. For the accused either
confines himself to denying that he did it or accuses
another of having done it. Further, there is more
than one way of transferring the charge to another.
At times this results in mutual accusation, which the
Greeks call and some of our own authors
concertative accusation. At times, on the other hand,
the charge is transferred to some person who
cannot be brought to trial, and may be either
known or unknown again, if the person is known,
he may be someone outside the case or the victim
himself, who may be alleged to have committed
suicide. In such cases we compare characters,
motives and other circumstances in the same way
as in eases of mutual accusation. Cicero, for instance,
in the pro Vareno diverts the charge from the
accused to the slaves of Ancharius and in the pro
Scauro throws the suspicion of Bostar's murder upon
his mother. There is also a different form of comparison, which comes into play when both parties
claim the credit of some act, and yet another kind,
when the question is not as between two persons,
but as between two acts; that is to say, the
question is not which of the two committed an act,
but which of two acts was committed. Finally,
if the act and the identity of the author are both admitted, we may still raise the question of his
intention. I shall now proceed to detail. As an example of
joint denial covering both the act and the identity
of the author we may take the following statements, In cases of
murder or poisoning the denial is often divided as
follows But if the
defence say, the
burden falls solely on the accuser, for the accused can
say nothing more against the charge except perhaps
in the way of casting certain suspicions, which he
should throw out in the vaguest terms, since if you
make one definite assertion, you will have to prove it
or run the risk of losing your case. For when the
question lies between our statement and that of our
opponent, one or other will be regarded as true.
Thus when the point on which we relied for our
defence is overthrown, there is nothing left but the
points that tell against us. For example, when the
question turns on symptoms, which may point either
to poisoning or internal disease, there is no third
course left open and consequently each party sticks
to his statement. At times the question turns on
the nature of the fact, whether, for instance, death
was due to poisoning or internal disease, and arguments are introduced which are drawn from the
circumstances alone without any reference to the
person concerned. For example, it makes a difference whether the deceased was cheerful or depressed,
had been working or taking his ease, had been awake
or sleeping previous to the festive gathering that was followed by his death. The age of the deceased
is also an important factor, and it is desirable to
know whether he died suddenly or after a long
period of ill health. If the question turns only on
his sudden death, both parties will have still freer
scope for discussion. At times the character of the
accused may be adduced to prove the fact, and to
make it likely that it was or was not a case of
poisoning because the accused is or is not a likely
person to have committed such an act. When, on the other hand, the enquiry concerns
both the accused and the act, the natural order for
the accuser to pursue is to commence by proving
that the act has been committed and then to go on
to show that it was committed by the accused. If,
however, proofs of the authorship of the crime are
more in number than the proofs of the commission,
this order may be reversed. On the other hand, the
accused will always begin by denying the act, since
if this can be successfully proved, there is no need
to say anything more, while if it is not proved, there
remain other means of defence. Similarly, when the dispute turns solely on the act
and, the act being proved, there can be no doubt as
to the author, arguments may be drawn in like
manner both from the person and the facts, although
with reference to the question of fact alone. Take the
following controversial theme as an example, for it
is best to employ scholastic themes as illustrations
since they are more familiar to the student. There is no doubt
who administered the draught, and, if it was poison,
there is no question as to the author but the
problem as to whether the draught was poison can
only be decided by arguments drawn from the
character of the accused. There remains a third type of conjectural case
where the fact is admitted, and the only question
is as to the author. It is unnecessary for me to
quote examples, since such cases are of frequent
occurrence. For example, it may be clear that a
man has been killed or that sacrilege has been committed, but the person accused of the crime may
deny his guilt. It is from such circumstances that
cases of mutual accusation arise, where it is admitted
that the crime has been committed, but each party
charges the other with being the author. With regard to this class of case Celsus points out that they
cannot actually occur in the courts, a fact which I
imagine is familiar to all for the jury is empanelled
to try one accused person only, and even though
the defence and the prosecution may accuse each
other of tile crime, the first case must be tried before
the second. Apollodorus again stated that mutual
accusation involved two separate disputes, and this
is of course in conformity with the practice of the
courts, which insists on two separate trials. On the
other hand, mutual accusation is possible in cases
tried before the senate or the emperor, and even in
the courts the fact of mutual accusation will involve no difference in the pleadings, since the same
methods will be required whether the verdict is
given on both charges simultaneously or only on
one. In such cases the defence must always come
first for three reasons. In the first place, we naturally prefer to secure our own safety than to injure
our opponent, while secondly, our accusation will
carry greater weight if we have first proved our
own innocence, and thirdly, we shall thus secure
a double line of defence. For the man who says, is then free to go on to say, whereas it is superfluous for the
man who says, to go on to say, Further, such cases consist of comparison, which
may be effected in different ways. For we may either
compare our case in its entirety with that of our
adversary, or we may compare individual arguments.
The choice between these two methods can only
be determined by the requirements of the case. For
example, in the pro Vareno, Cicero, in dealing with
the first charge, compares the individual arguments
for it would have been rash in connexion with the
second charge to compare the position of a stranger
with that of a mother. It is therefore best, if
possible, to refute argument by individual argument
if, however, our individual arguments are weak, we
shall try to secure success by comparison of case
with case as a whole. But whether the case is
one of mutual accusation, or the accused throws
the guilt upon his opponent without making any
formal accusation as Roscius did without indicting his accusers, or the responsibility for the deed be
placed on the victims themselves, whom we allege
to have perished by their own hand, the arguments
for both sides of the case will be compared in
exactly the same way as in cases of mutual accusation. The class of case last mentioned by me is,
however, not merely of frequent occurrence in
the schools, but sometimes actually occurs in the
courts. For example, the sole question in the
case of Naevius of Arpinum was whether he threw
his wife out of the window or she threw herself.
My speech in this case is the only one of all my
pleadings that I have so far published, and I admit
that I was led to do so merely by a youthful
desire for glory. For the other speeches which
circulate as mine have little in them that actually
fell from my lips, having been corrupted by the
carelessness of the shorthand-writers who took
them down with a view to making money out of
them. There is also another type of conjectural case
which, though it involves two questions, is different
from cases of mutual accusation; such cases are concerned with rewards and may be illustrated by the
following controversial theme. Now just as in cases of mutual accusation where each
party shifts the guilt to his opponent, so in this case we compare the characters, motives, means,
opportunities, instruments and evidence of the
persons who claim the reward. There is yet another
type of case which, though not one of mutual
accusation, is treated in the same way I mean a
case in which we enquire, without accusing anyone, which of two acts has taken place. For both
parties make and defend their own statement of
the case. Thus in the suit concerning the estate
of Urbinia the claimant says that Clusinius Figulus,
the son of Urbinia, on the defeat of the army
in which he was serving, fled and after various
misfortunes, being even even kept in captivity by
the king, at length returned to Italy and his own
home in the Marrucine district, where he was recognised. To this Pollio replies that he had been a
slave to two masters at Pisaurum, that he had
practised medicine, and finally, after receiving his
freedom, inserted himself into a gang of slaves who
were for sale and was at his own request purchased by himself. Does not the whole suit consist
of comparison between the two cases and of two
different and opposite sets of conjecture But the
method to be followed is identical whether the case
be one of accusation and defence or of claim and
denial of the claim. Conjecture is, in the first place, based on what is
past, under which I include persons, causes and
intent. For in dealing with a case we first ask
what the accused intended to do, next what he was
in a position to do, and lastly what he actually did.
Consequently the first point on which we must fix
our attention is the character of the accused. It is
the business of the accuser to make any charge that he may bring against the accused not merely discreditable, but as consistent as possible with the
crime for which he is arraigned. For example, if
he calls a man accused of murder a debauchee or
an adulterer, the discredit attaching to such charges
will no doubt tell against the accused, but will, on
the other hand, do less to prove the case than if
he shows him to be bold, insolent, cruel or reckless.
On the other hand, counsel for the defence must,
as far as possible, aim at denying, excusing or
extenuating such charges, or, if that be impossible,
show that they are not relevant to the case. For
there are many charges which not only have no
mutual resemblance, but may even at times contradict each other, as for instance if a man accused
of theft is called prodigal or careless. For it is
not likely that one and the same man should at
once despise money and covet it. If such means
of defence are not available, we must take refuge
with the plea that the charges made are not
relevant to the case, that because a man has committed certain sins, it does not follow that he has
committed all, and that the accusers ventured to
make such false charges merely because they hoped
by injuring and insulting the accused to be able
to overwhelm him with the unpopularity thus
created. There are also other topics which arise
from and against the statement of the case by the
prosecution. The defence may begin by drawing
arguments from the person involved, and will at
times urge on general grounds that it is incredible
that a father has been killed by his son or that a
commander has betrayed his country to the enemy.
The answer to such arguments is easy, for we may urge that bad men are capable of every crime, as
is shown by every-day occurrences, or that the
atrocious nature of a crime is but a poor argument
against its having been committed. At times we
may base our arguments on the special circumstances
of the person involved. This may be done in various
ways rank, for example, may be pleaded in defence
of the accused, or at times, on the other hand, may
be employed to prove his guilt on the ground that
he trusted to his rank to secure impunity. Similarly
poverty, humble rank, wealth may be used as arguments for or against the accused according to the
talent of the advocate. Upright character, however,
and the blamelessness of his past life are always of
the utmost assistance to the accused. If no charge
is made against his character, counsel for the defence
will lay great stress on this fact, while the accuser
will attempt to restrict the judge to the sole consideration of the actual issue which the court has
to decide, and will say that there must always be
a first step in crime and that a first offence is not
to be regarded as the occasion for celebrating a
feast in honour of the defendant's character. So
much for the methods of reply which will be employed by the prosecution. But he will also in his
opening speech endeavour to dispose the judges to
believe that it is not so much that he is unable,
as that he is unwilling to bring any charge against
the character of the accused. Consequently it is
better to abstain from casting any slur on the past
life of the accused than to attack him with slight
or frivolous charges which are manifestly false,
since such a proceeding discredits the rest of
our argument. Further, the advocate who brings no charges against the accused may be believed to
have omitted all reference to past offences on the
ground that such reference was not necessary, while
the advocate who heaps up baseless charges thereby
admits that his only argument is to be found in the
past life of the accused, and that he has deliberately
preferred to risk defeat on this point rather than
say nothing at all about it. As regards the other
arguments derived from character, I have already
discussed them in connexion with of
argument. The next type of proof is derived from causes or
motives, such as anger, hatred, fear, greed or hope,
since all motives can be classified as species of one
or other of these. If any of these motives can be
plausibly alleged against the accused, it is the duty
of the accuser to make it appear that such motives
may lead a man to commit any crime, and to exaggerate the particular motives which he selects for
the purpose of his argument. If no such motive can
be alleged, he must take refuge in suggesting that
there must have been some hidden motive, or in
asserting that, if he committed the act, all enquiry
into motive is irrelevant or that a motiveless crime
is even more abominable than one which has a
motive. Counsel for the defence, on the other hand,
will, wherever it be possible, emphasise the point
that it is incredible that any act should be committed
without a motive. Cicero develops this point with
great energy in a number of his speeches, but more
especially in his defence of Varenus, who had everything else against him and was as a matter of fact
condemned. But if the prosecution do allege some
motive, he will either say that the motive alleged is false or inadequate or unknown to the accused. For
it is possible that a man may be quite ignorant of
motives imputed to him. He may not, for example,
have known whether the man whom he is accused
of having killed had appointed him his heir
or intended to prosecute him. All else failing,
we may urge that motives are not necessarily of
importance. For what man is there who is not
liable to the emotions of fear, hatred or hope, and
yet numbers of persons act on these motives without
committing crime Nor should we neglect the point
that all motives do not apply to all persons. For
example, although poverty may in certain cases be a
motive for theft, it will not have the same force with
men such as Curius or Fabricius. The question has been raised as to whether we
should deal first with persons or motives, and different
orators have given different answers Cicero as a rule
prefers to treat motives first. For my own part, if
the circumstances of the case do not point strongly
in either direction, I consider that the most natural
course is to begin by dealing with persons. For the
enquiry whether any crime can credibly be imputed
to such a man as the accused is of a more general
character than the question whether some one
particular crime can be imputed, and in addition
involves a greater correctness in division. Still, in
many cases expediency may make it desirable to
reverse the order. Further, we have to seek not
merely motives affecting the will, but also causes
leading to error, such as drunkenness or ignorance.
For just as such considerations lessen the guilt of a
crime when regarded from the point of view of its
quality, so they tell heavily against the criminal as far as the question of fact is concerned. I should
imagine that there could never be a case, or at any rate
an actual case in the courts, in which neither side said
anything about the character of the persons involved;
but this is not true of causes and motives, for it is
often wholly unnecessary to trouble ourselves about
them, as, for example, in cases of theft or adultery,
crimes which carry their motives on the face of them. Next we must consider the intention, a term which
involves a number of questions, such as whether it is
probable that the accused hoped that he would be
able to carry such a crime into effect, or that it
would escape detection when committed, or that,
even if detected, it would be pardoned or punished
but lightly or after considerable lapse of time, or
that the inconvenience involved by the penalty
would be outweighed by the pleasure resulting from
the crime or again, whether it was worth while
incurring the penalty; and further, whether he could
have done the deed at some other time and in some
other way, or with greater ease or security, as Cicero
says in the pro Milone, where he mentions the
numerous occasions when his client could have killed
Clodius with impunity. There is also the question
why the accused should have chosen that particular
place or time or means for the commission of the
crime, a topic to which Cicero gives a thorough
treatment in the same passage; or whether, without
having the least reason for the deed, he was carried
away by the impulse of the moment and acted
without deliberate purpose for it is a common
saying that crimes are irrational, or finally, whether
he was led astray by the fact that crime had become
a habit with him. Having dealt with the question whether he
intended to commit the crime, we proceed to the
question whether he was in a position to commit it.
Under this head we discuss the place and occasion of
the offence. For instance, in a case of theft we ask
whether it was committed in a secluded or frequented
spot, in the daytime, when witnesses are more
numerous, or by night, when success is more difficult.
Consequently we shall consider all the circumstances
rendering the act difficult or easy of accomplishment;
these require no illustration, being numerous and
familiar. This second topic is of such importance
that, if it is impossible to give it satisfactory treatment, the case falls to the ground; if, however, we
succeed in dealing with it adequately, we must
proceed to consider whether the accused actually
committed the act. But this topic involves conjecture as to intention, for it is from these facts that
we infer whether he hoped for success or not.
Therefore we must also consider the question of
the means at his disposal, such, for example, as the
retinues of Clodius and Milo. The question whether he actually did the deed
belongs, in the first place, to the second division of
time, namely the present, and secondly to time that
is almost, though not actually contemporary under
this latter head come circumstances such as noise,
cries or groans, while concealment, fear and the
like belong to subsequent time. To these must be
added indications, which we have already discussed
elsewhere, and words and acts antecedent or subsequent to the crime. These words and acts are either
our own or those of others. With regard to words,
our own do us greater harm and bring us less profit than do those of others, while those of others bring
us greater profit and do us less harm than our own.
On the other hand, with regard to deeds, it is sometimes from our own and sometimes from those of
others that we derive the greatest advantage, as, for
example, when our opponent has done something
which tells in our favour but our own acts are
always more injurious to our case than are those
of others. Again, with regard to words, we must
distinguish between those whose meaning is clear
and those whose significance is doubtful. The latter
will necessarily give less assistance to either side, be
they our own words or another's. On the other hand,
any ambiguity in our own words will always tell
against us, as, for example, in the following controversial theme. When the ambiguity lies in words used by
others, they can never do us any harm, unless he
who uttered them be unknown or dead; I will give
two illustrations of my meaning and, For if the speaker is available for
examination, he will clear up the ambiguity. Finally,
whereas our own words and deeds can only be justified by their intention, the deeds and words of others
can be disposed of in a number of different ways. My remarks on this subject have, I think, been
confined to one very important class of conjectural
cases, but something of what I have said will apply
to all cases. For example, in cases concerned with theft, deposits and loans, arguments are derived both
from possibilities as when we enquire whether there
was any money to deposit, and from persons, as when
we raise the question whether it is credible that anyone deposited money with this man or trusted him
with a loan, or that the claimant is bringing a false
accusation, or that the accused repudiates his debt or
is a thief. But even in the case of an accusation of
theft, just as in an accusation of murder, we enquire
both into the act and the author, while in cases
concerned with loans and deposits there are also
two questions though these are always distinct
from one another, namely, whether the money was
delivered and whether it has been repaid. Cases of
adultery are marked by the following peculiarity,
that, as a rule, the safety of two persons is involved,
and it is necessary to say something of the past life
of both, although some have raised the question
whether both parties should be defended together.
The line to be taken must depend on the circumstances of the individual case if the defence of one
party lends support to the defence of the other, I
should defend them conjointly; if the reverse is the
case, I should treat the two cases separately. However, that no one may think me somewhat hasty in
saying that two persons are as a rule involved in
charges of adultery, I would point out that I would
not assert that this is always the case. The
woman alone may be accused of adultery with a
person unknown we may say, The case is similar in accusations of
forgery for either there are several accused or only one. The writer of a document always regards it as
necessary to support the signatory, but the signatory
does not always support the writer of the document,
for it is always possible that he has been deceived
on the matter. On the other hand, the man who is
said to have called in their services, and for whom
the document is alleged to have been written, will
always defend both writer and signatories. The
arguments employed in cases of treason or attempted
tyranny will be drawn from the same sources. But the custom prevalent in the schools of regarding everything not definitely stated in the theme as
being in the speaker's favour, is likely to prove
harmful to students destined for practice in the
courts. You bring a charge of adultery. You charge
me with treason. You charge me with poisoning. Or in defence of
one charged with attempting to establish himself as
tyrant, the declaimer will cry, I do not deny that these questions
should be asked, or that we should use them as
far as is permitted by the rle which we have
assumed; for even in the courts I feel that it will
be desirable to put such questions, if my opponent
is not in a position to reply effectively; but we have
often felt the lack of such freedom in the courts,
whereas in the schools there is scarcely a case where
one or more examples of this method are not to be
found. Similar to this is the practice which some declaimers allow themselves in their perorations
of assigning children, parents and nurses to their
characters at will, though it is more reasonable to
call for evidence which is not explicitly mentioned
in the statement of the theme than to introduce it
ourselves. With regard to the method to be followed when
we enquire into intention, I have said enough in
dividing the subject into three questions, namely,
whether the accused intended to do the deed,
whether he was in a position to do it and whether
he actually did it. For the method of enquiring
into the purpose with which an act was committed
is identical with that employed in enquiring whether
the deed was intended, since it amounts to asking
whether a criminal act was intended. Further, the
order in which the facts are stated may either contribute to or detract from the credibility of our case;
for consistency and the reverse depend to a very
great extent on the way the circumstances are
arranged. But we shall be unable to detect these
qualities unless we consider the circumstances in
connexion with the case as a whole. None the less,
it will always be necessary to consider what are best
suited to be placed together. III. Conjecture is followed by definition. For the
man who cannot assert that he has done nothing,
must needs take refuge in the assertion that lie has
not committed the act which is alleged against him.
Consequently the laws which govern definition are
for the most part the same as those which govern conjecture, the only difference lying in the method to be
employed in defence in cases such as those concerned
with theft, deposits or adultery. For just as we say, so we say, Sometimes we may pass from quality to
definition, as in actions concerned with lunacy, cruelty
and offences against the State. In such cases if it
is impossible to assert that the acts alleged were
right, we are left with such pleas as, Definition is the statement of the fact called in
question in appropriate, clear and concise language.
As I have already said, it consists mainly in the
statement of genus, species, difference and property.
For example, if you wish to define a horse for I will
take a familiar example, the genus is animal, the
species mortal, the diffrence irrational since man also
is mortal and the properly neighing. Definition is
employed by the orator for a number of different
reasons. For sometimes, though there may be no
doubt as to a term, there is a question as to what it
includes, or, on the other hand, there may be no
doubt about the thing, but no agreement as to the
term to be applied to it. When the term is agreed,
but the thing doubtful, conjecture may sometimes
come into play, as, for instance, in the question, For the man who denies that god
is a spirit permeating all things, assuredly asserts
that the epithet is falsely applied to his
nature, like Epicurus, who gives him a human form
and makes him reside in the intermundane space.
While both use the same term god, both have to employ conjecture to decide which of the two meanings
is consistent with fact. Sometimes again we have
recourse to quality, as in the question, This form of question is of
frequent occurrence in the courts. For instance, the
question may arise whether a man caught in a
brothel with another man's wife is an adulterer.
Here there is no doubt about the name; it is the
significance of the act which is in doubt, since the
question is whether he has committed any sin at all.
For if he has sinned, his sin can only be adultery.
There is a different type of question where the
dispute is concerned with the term to be applied,
which depends on the letter of the law it is a form
of question which can only arise in the courts from
the actual words on which the dispute turns. Take
as examples the questions, whether suicide is a form
of homicide, or whether the man who forces a tyrant
to kill himself can be considered a tyrannicide, or
whether magical incantations are equivalent to the
crime of poisoning. In all these cases there is no
doubt about the facts, for it is well known that there
is a difference between killing oneself and killing
another, between slaying a tyrant and forcing him
to suicide, between employing incantations and
administering a deadly draught, but we enquire
whether we are justified in calling them by the
same name. Though I hardly like to differ from Cicero, who
follows many authorities in saying that definition is
concerned with identity and difference since he
who denies the applicability of one term must always
produce another term which he regards as preferable, for my own part I consider that definition
falls into three types, which I may perhaps call
species. For at times it is convenient merely to enquire whether one particular term is applicable to
a given thing, as in the question whether an act
committed in a brothel is adultery. If we deny
that it is adultery, there is no need to state what it
should be called, since we have given a total denial
to the charge. Secondly, there are occasions when
the question is which of two terms is to be applied
to a thing, as in the question whether an act is
theft or sacrilege. It may be sufficient for the
defence that it is not sacrilege, but it is still necessary
to show what else it is, and therefore we must define
both. Thirdly, there are times when the question
concerns things which are different in species, and
we ask whether two different things are to be called
by the same name, in spite of the fact that each has
a special name of its own for example, is tile same
name applicable both to a love-potion and a poison
But in all disputes of this kind the question is
whether one thing is another thing as well, since
the name in doubt does without question apply to
something else. It is sacrilege to steal a sacred
object from a temple; is it also sacrilege to steal
private property from a temple It is adultery to
lie with another man's wile in one's own house; is
it adultery to do so in a brothel It is tyrannicide
to slay a tyrant; is it tyrannicide to force him to
slay himself Consequently the syllogism, to which
I shall return later, is virtually a weaker form of
definition, since while definition seeks to determine
whether one thing has the same name as another,
syllogism seeks to determine whether one thing is
to be regarded as identical with another. There is
moreover great variety in definitions. For instance,
persons will give different verbal expression to things about which they are really in agreement
thus rhetoric is defined as the science of speaking
well, as the science of correct conception or correct
expression of what we have to say, as the science of
speading in accordance with the excellence of an orator
and again of speaking to the purpose. And we must
take care to discover how it is that definitions,
identical in meaning, differ in the form in which
they are expressed. However, this is a subject for
discussion and not for a quarrel. Definition is sometimes required to explain rare or obscure words such
as clarigatio or erctum citum, or again to explain
familiar words such as penus or litus. This variety in definition has caused some writers
to include it under conjecture, others under quality
and others again under legal questions. Some, on
the other hand, entirely reject the elaborate and
formal methods of reasoning employed by dialectic,
regarding such ingenuity as suited rather to quibbles
over words in philosophical discussions than as likely
to carry much weight in the performance of the
duties of an orator. For though in dialogue definition may serve to fetter the person who has got
to reply in chains of his own making, or may force
him to silence, or even to reluctant confession of a
point which tells against himself, it is of less use in
forensic cases. For there we have to persuade the
judge, who, even though he may be tied and bound
with our words, will still dissent in silence, unless he
is brought really into touch with the actual facts.
And what need has a pleader for such precision of
definition Even if I do not say that man is an
animal, mortal and rational, surely I shall still be
able, by setting forth the numerous properties of his body and mind in more general terms, to distinguish
him from gods or dumb beasts. Again, may not the
same thing be defined in more than one way, as
Cicero does when he says, May it not be given a wide and varied treatment
such as is frequently employed by all orators For
it is rare to find orators falling victims to that form
of slavery introduced from the practice of the philosophers and tying themselves down to certain
definite words; indeed it is absolutely forbidden by
Marcus Antonius in the de Oratore of Cicero.
For it is a most dangerous practice, since, if we make
a mistake in a single word, we are like to lose our
whole case, and consequently the compromise adopted
by Cicero in the pro Caecina is the safest course to
follow; this consists in setting forth the facts without
running any risks over the exactness of our terminology. These are his words Or again, we may prove
before we define, as Cicero does in the Philippics,
where he proves that Servius Sulpicius was killed by
Antony and introduces his definition at the conclusion in the following terms
I would not, however, deny that such rules should be
employed, if it will help our case, and that, if we
can produce a definition which is at once strong and
concise, it will be not merely an ornament to our
speech, but will also produce the strongest impression, provided always that it cannot be overthrown. The order to be followed in definition is invariable.
We first ask what a thing is, and then, whether it is
this. And there is generally more difficulty in the
establishment than in the application of a definition.
In determining what a thing is, there are two things
which require to be done we must establish our
own definition and destroy that of our opponent.
Consequently in the schools, where we ourselves
imagine our opponent's reply, we have to introduce
two definitions, which should suit the respective
sides of the case as well as it is in our power to
make them. But in the courts we must give careful
consideration to the question whether our definition
may not be superfluous and irrelevant or ambiguous
or inconsistent or even of no less service to our
opponents than to ourselves, since it will be the
fault of the pleader if any of these errors occur. On
the other hand, we shall ensure the right definition,
if we first make up our minds what it is precisely
that we desire to effect for, this done, we shall be
able to suit our words to serve our purpose. To
make my meaning clearer, I will follow my usual
practice and quote a familiar example. There is no doubt about his
guilt; the question is whether the name given by
the law applies to the charge. It is therefore
debated whether the act constitutes sacrilege. The
accuser employs this term on the ground that the
money was stolen from a temple the accused denies
that the act is sacrilege, on the ground that the
money stolen was private property, but admits that it is theft. The prosecutor will therefore give the
following definitions, The accused will reply
with another definition, Each impugns the other's definition. A definition may be overthrown on two
grounds it may be false or it may be too narrow.
There is indeed a possible third ground, namely
irrelevance, but this is a fault which no one save a
fool will commit. It is a false definition if you say, for though the horse
is an animal, it is irrational. Again, a thing which
is common to something else cannot be a property
of the thing defined. In the case under discussion,
then, the accused alleges that the definition given
by the accuser is false, whereas the accuser cannot
do the same by his opponent's definition, since to
steal a sacred object is undoubtedly sacrilege. He
therefore alleges that the definition is too narrow
and requires the addition of the words But the most effective method of
establishing and refuting definitions is derived from
the examination of properties and differences, and
sometimes even from considerations of etymology,
while all these considerations will, like others, find
further support in equity and occasionally in conjecture. Etymology is rarely of assistance, but the
following will provide an example of its use. Great
ingenuity may be exercised with regard to properties
and differences, as for instance in the question
whether a person assigned to his creditor for debt, who is condemned by the law to remain in a state
of servitude until he has paid his debt, is actually a
slave. One party will advance the following definition, The other will produce the definition, This definition,
though it differs considerably from the other, will be
quite useless unless it is supported by properties
and differences. For the opponent will say that the
person in question is actually serving as a slave or is
legally in a state of servitude. We must therefore
look for properties and differences, to which in
passing I devoted a brief discussion in my fifth book.
A slave when manumitted becomes a freedman a
man who is assigned for debt becomes a free man on
the restoration of his liberty. A slave cannot acquire
his freedom without the consent of his master a
man assigned for debt can acquire it by paying his
debt without the consent of his master being
necessary. A slave is outside the law; a man
assigned for debt is under the law. Turning to
properties, we may note the following which are
possessed by none save the free, the three names
praenomen, nomen and cognomen and membership
of a tribe, all of which are possessed by the man
assigned for debt. By settling what a thing is we have come near
to determining its identity, for our purpose is to
produce a definition that is applicable to our case.
Now the most important element in a definition is
provided by quality, as, for example, in the question
whether love be a form of madness. To this point in our procedure belong those proofs which according
to Cicero are peculiar to definition, that is, proofs
drawn from antecedents, consequents, adjuncts, contraries, causes, effects and similarities, with the
nature of which I have already dealt. I will, however, quote a passage from the pro Caecina in which
Cicero includes brief proofs drawn from origins,
causes, effects, antecedents and consequents But he also argued from similarity Arguments may
also be drawn from contraries, as for instance in the
question whether a love-potion can be a poison, in
view of the fact that a poison is not a love-potion. In order that my young students and I call them
mine, because the young student is always dear to
me may form a clearer conception of this second
kind of definition, I will once more quote a fictitious
controversial theme. The definition produced by the accuser
will run as follows The
definition given by the accused will be, Without any formal definition it would be sufficient for
the accuser to argue as follows To which the accused might answer, Sometimes we have a settled definition on which
both parties are agreed, as in the following example
from Cicero The
question however, is, whether that majesty has been impaired, as for example in the ease of Cornelius.
But even although the case may seem to turn on
definition, the point for decision is one of quality,
since there is no doubt about the definition, and
must be assigned to the qualitative basis. It is a
mere accident that I have come to mention quality
at this moment, but in point of fact quality is the
matter that comes next in order for discussion. IV. In speaking of quality we sometimes use
the word in its most general sense, which covers
a number of different questions. For we enquire
sometimes into the nature and form of things as
for instance whether the soul is immortal or whether
god is to be conceived of in human form. Sometimes, on the other hand, the question turns on size
and number, as, for instance, what is the size of
the sun or whether there are more worlds than
one. In all these cases we arrive at our conclusions
by conjecture, yet each involves a question of quality.
Such questions are sometimes treated in deliberative themes for example, if Caesar is deliberating
whether to attack Britain, he must enquire into the
nature of the Ocean, consider whether Britain is an
island a fact not then ascertained, and estimate its
size and the number of troops which lie will require
for the invasion. Under the same head of quality
fall questions whether certain things should be done
or not and certain objects sought or avoided such
topics are specially adapted for deliberative themes,
but occur with some frequency in controversial
themes as well, the only difference being that in
the latter we deal with what is past and in the
former with the future. Similarly all the topics
of demonstrative oratory involve a qualitative basis. The facts are admitted, and the question turns on
their quality, the dispute being entirely concerned
with rewards or penalties or their quantity. The
case is therefore of two kinds, simple or comparative, the former dealing with what is just, the latter
with what is juster, or most just. When the point
for decision is the penalty to be inflicted, the duty
of the pleader will be to defend, extenuate or excuse
the act on which the charge is based, or even,
according to some, to plead for mercy. By far the strongest line that can be taken in
defence is to assert that the act which forms the
subject of the charge is actually honourable. A
man is disinherited because he went on military
service, stood for office or married without his
father's consent. We defend this act. This form
of defence is called by the followers of
Hermagoras, that is, defence by objection, the term
being used with reference to the purport of the
defendant's plea. I can find no exact Latin translation of the term; we call it an absolute defence.
But in such cases the question is concerned with the
justice or injustice of the act alone. Justice is
either natural or conventional. Natural justice is
found in actions of inherent worth. Under this
head come the virtues of piety, loyalty, self-control
and the like. To these some add the rendering
of like for like. But this view must not be adopted
without consideration for to retaliate, or meet
violence with violence on the one hand, does not
imply injustice on the part of the aggressor, while
on the other hand it does not follow that the first
act was just merely because the two acts were alike.
In cases where there is justice on both sides, the two parties must both come under the same law
and the same conditions, and it would not perhaps
be untrue to say that things can never be spoken
of as like if there is any point in which they
are dissimilar. Convention, on the other hand, is
to be found in laws, customs, legal precedents and
agreements. There is another form of defence by which we
defend an act in itself indefensible by arguments
drawn from without. This the Greeks call by opposition. Here again there is no
Latin equivalent, since we call it defence by assumption. The strongest line to take in this form
of defence is to defend the act forming the subject
of the charge by appealing to its motive. An
example of this is provided by the defence put
forward on behalf of Orestes, Horatius or Milo. The
term or counter-accusation, is employed
when our defence consists entirely in accusing the
person whom our opponents are seeking to vindicate. There is another form
of defence based on an appeal to the motives of
the act which is the opposite of that which I have
just described It consists not in defending the act
per se, as we do when we employ the absolute
defence, nor in opposing another act to it, but
in appealing to the interests of the State, of a
number of persons, of our opponent himself or finally
at times of ourselves, provided always that the act
in question is such as we might lawfully do in our
own interests. If, however, the accuser is a stranger
and insists on the letter of the law, this form
of defence will invariably be useless, though it may serve our turn if the dispute is of a domestic
character. For example, in a suit concerned
with the question of disinheritance a father may,
without reflecting on himself, say to his sons that
his act was of importance to his own interests,
and the same plea may be urged by a husband
accused of cruelty by his wile or a son who
alleges that his father is insane. But in such cases
the position of the man who seeks to avoid
loss is stronger than that of him who aims at
positive advantage. Precisely similar methods are
also employed in questions that occur in real life.
For the scholastic themes concerned with the disowning of children are on exactly the same footing
as the cases of sons disinherited by their parents
which are tried in the public courts, or of those
claims for the recovery of property which are tried
in the centum viral court themes dealing with cruelty
find an actual parallel in those cases in which the
wife claims the restoration of her dowry, and the
question is whose fault it was that led to the divorce
and again the theme where the son accuses his father
of madness has its analogy in cases where a suit is
brought for the appointment of a guardian. Under
the same heading as the appeal to public or personal
interest comes the plea that the act in question
prevented the occurrence of something worse. For
in a comparison of evils the lesser evil must be
regarded as a positive good for example, Mancinus
may defend the treaty made with the Numantines
on the ground that it saved the army from annihilation. This form of defence is called by
the Greeks, while we style it defence by comparison. Such are the methods by which we may defend an act. If it is impossible to defend an
act either on its merits or with the assistance of
arguments from without, the next best course will
be to shift the charge, if possible, to another.
It is for this reason that the basis of competence has
been held to apply even to those who cannot
plead the letter of the law in this connexion. In
some cases, then, the blame will be thrown on a
person for example, Gracchus, when accused of
making the treaty with the Numantines and it was
fear of this accusation that seems to have led him
to bring forward the democratic laws of his tribuneship may plead that he made it as the representative of his commander-in-chief. At times, on the
other hand, the blame may be shifted to some
thing for instance, a person who has failed to
comply with some testamentary injunction may plead
that the laws forbade such compliance. The Greek
term for such shifting is If these methods of defence are out of the
question, we must take refuge in making excuses.
We may plead ignorance. For example, if a man
has branded a runaway slave and the latter is
subsequently adjudged to be a free man, he may
deny that he was cognisant of the truth. Or
we may plead necessity; for instance, if a soldier
overstays his leave, he may plead that his return
was delayed by floods or ill health. Again, the
blame is often cast upon fortune, while sometimes
we assert that, although we undoubtedly did wrong,
we did so with the best intentions. Instances
of these two latter forms of excuse are, however,
so numerous and obvious that there is no need for
me to cite them here. If all the above-mentioned resources prove unavailable, we must see whether it may not be
possible to extenuate the offence. It is here that
what some call the quantitative basis comes into
play. But when quantity is considered in reference to punishment or reward, it is determined by
the quality of the act, and therefore in my opinion
comes under the qualitative basis, as also does quantity
which is used with reference to number by the
Greeks, who distinguish between and
 we, however, have only one name for
the two. In the last resort we may plead for mercy, a though
most writers deny that this is ever admissible in the
courts. Indeed Cicero himself seems to support
this view in his defence of Quintus Ligarius where
he says, and so on. On the other
hand, in addressing the senate, the people, the emperor or any other authority who is in a position to
show clemency, such pleas for mercy have a legitimate
place. In such cases there are three points based
on the circumstances of the accused which are most
effective. The first is drawn from his previous life, if
he has been blameless in his conduct and deserved
well of the state, or if there is good hope that his
conduct will be blameless for the future and likely
to be of some use to his fellow men; the second is
operative if it appears that he has been sufficiently punished already on the ground that he has suffered
other misfortunes, or that his present peril is extreme,
or that he has repented of his sin; while thirdly we
may base his appeal on his external circumstances,
his birth, his rank, his connexions, his friendships. It is, however, on the judge that we shall pin our
highest hopes, if the circumstances be such that
acquittal will result in giving him a reputation for
clemency rather than for regrettable weakness. But
even in the ordinary courts appeals for mercy are
frequently employed to a large extent, although they
will not colour the whole of our pleading. For the
following form of division is common a plea which has often
turned the balance in doubtful cases, while practically
all perorations contain such appeals. Sometimes
indeed the whole case may rest on such considerations. For example, if a father has made an express
declaration that he has disinherited his son because
lie was in love with a woman of the town, will not
the whole question turn on the point whether it was
the father's duty to pardon such an offence and
whether it is the duty of the centumviral court
to overlook it Nay, even in penal prosecutions
governed by strict forms of law we raise two separate
questions first whether the penalty has been incurred,
and secondly whether, if so, it ought to be inflicted.
Still the view of the authorities to whom I have
referred that an accused person cannot be saved
from the clutches of the law by this method of
defence is perfectly correct. With regard to rewards, there are two questions
which confront us namely, whether the claimant is deserving of any reward, and, if so, whether he deserves so great a reward. If there are two claimants,
we have to decide which is the more worthy of the
two; if there are a number, who is the most worthy.
The treatment of these questions turns on the kind
of merit possessed by the claimants. And we must
consider not merely the act whether it has merely
to be stated or has to be compared with the acts of
others, but the person of the claimant as well. For
it makes a great difference whether a tyrannicide be
young or old, man or woman, a stranger or a connexion. The place may also be discussed in a number
of ways was the city in which the tyrant was killed
one inured to tyranny or one which had always been
free was he killed in the citadel or in his own
house The means, too, and the time call for consideration was he killed by poison or the sword
was he killed in time of peace or war, when he was
intending to lay aside his power or to venture on
some fresh crime Further, in considering the
question of merit, the danger and difficulty of the act
will carry great weight, while with regard to liberality
it will similarly be of importance to consider the
character of the person from whom it proceeds. For
liberality is more pleasing in a poor man than in a
rich, in one who confers than in one who returns a
benefit, in a father than in a childless man. Again,
we must consider the immediate object of the gift,
the occasion and the intention, that is to say, whether
it was given in the hope of subsequent profit; and
so on with a number of similar considerations. The
question of quality therefore makes the highest
demands on the resources of oratory, since it affords
the utmost scope for a display of talent on either side, while there is no topic in which the emotional appeal
is so effective. For conjecture has often to introduce
proofs from without and uses arguments drawn from
the actual subject matter, whereas the real task of
eloquence is to demonstrate quality there lies its
kingdom, there its power, and there its unique
victory. Verginius includes under quality cases concerned
with disinheritance, lunacy, cruelty to a wife, and
claims of female orphans to marry relatives. The
questions thus involved are, it is true, frequently questions of quality, while some writers style them questions of moral obligation. But the laws governing
these cases sometimes admit of other bases. For
example, conjecture is involved in quite a number of
such cases, as when the accused urges either that he
did not commit the act or, if he did, acted with the
best intentions. I could quote many examples of
this kind. Again, it is definition which tells us what
precisely is meant by lunacy or cruelty to a wife.
For as a rule the laws cited in such themes involve
certain legal questions, though not to such an extent
as to determine the basis of the case. But this notwithstanding, if the actual fact cannot be defended,
we may in the last resort base our defence on legal
grounds, in which case we shall consider how many
and what cases there are in which a father may not
disinherit his son, what charges fail to justify an
action for cruelty, and under what circumstances a
son is not allowed to accuse his father of lunacy. Disinheritance may be of two kinds. In the first
case it is for a completed crime for example, the son
who is disinherited may be a ravisher or an adulterer
in the second case it is for a crime which is still incomplete and terminable; an instance of this will
be the case where the son is disinherited because of
disobedience to his father. The first form of disinheritance always demands a certain harshness when
the father pleads his case, since the act is irrevocable,
whereas in the latter his pleading will be of a kindly
and almost persuasive nature, since he would prefer
not to disinherit him. On the other hand, the
pleading of the sons should in both cases be of a
subdued character and couched in a conciliatory
tone. I know that those who delight in making
covert attacks upon the father under the disguise
of some figure of speech will disagree with me
and I would not deny that their procedure may
sometimes be justifiable, since the theme may conceivably be such as to demand it; but it is certainly
to be avoided wherever possible. However, I shall
deal with the whole question of figures in a later
book. The treatment of the theme of cruelty to a
wife is not unlike that of the theme of disinheritance; for both demand a certain moderation on the
part of the accuser. Cases concerned with lunacy
arise either out of what has been done or out of
something which may or may not be done in the
future. In the former case the pleader is free to
attack as he will, but must none the less do so in
such a manner that, while denouncing the act, he
will yet express pity for the father on the ground
that he has erred by reason of his infirmity. On the
other hand, in the latter case, where the act has not yet taken place and there is nothing to prevent the
father changing his purpose, he must begin by a
prolonged attempt to induce him to change his mind,
and then, and only then, complain that it is madness
and not depravity of character that prevents him
from listening to the voice of reason; and the more
he praises his past character, the easier will it be to
prove the change which it has undergone owing to
the inroads of the disease. The accused, wherever
possible, must assume a temperate tone in his defence, for the reason that as a rule anger and excitement are near akin to madness. All these cases
have this much in common, that the accused does not
always defend his act, but often pleads excuse and
asks for pardon. For these are domestic quarrels, in
which the fact that the offence is an isolated case,
due to error and of a less serious character than
alleged, will sometimes suffice to secure an acquittal. There are, however, a number of other controversial themes involving quality, as, for example,
cases of assault. In these, although at times the
accused denies that he committed the assault, the
pleading as a rule is concerned with fact and intention. Then there are cases concerned with the
appointment of a prosecutor, which are known as
divinations. In this connexion Cicero, who was indicting Verres on the instruction of our Sicilian allies,
adopts the following division-to the effect that the
main point for consideration is, by whom those the
redress of whose wrongs forms the subject of the
trial would prefer to be represented, and by whom
the accused would least desire them to be represented. But in the great majority of cases the
questions raised are, which claimant has the strongest motives for undertaking the role of accuser, which is
likely to bring the greatest energy or talent to the
task, and which is likely to press the charge with
the greatest sincerity. Next we may take cases
concerned with guardianship, in which it is usual
to enquire whether it is necessary to investigate
anything save the accounts, and whether anything
can be demanded of the guardian except the
honest execution of his trust; his sagacity and the
success of his administration being beside the mark.
Cases of fraud on the part of an agent, which are
styled cases of conduct of business when they occur in
the actual courts, are of a similar nature, since they
also are concerned with the administration of a
trust. In addition to these we have the fictitious
cases of the schools which deal with crimes not covered
by the law, where the question is as a rule either
whether the crime is really not covered by the law
or whether it is a crime, though on rare occasions
both questions are raised. Cases of misconduct on
the part of an ambassador are of frequent occurrence
among the Greeks, even in actual life in these the
legal question is raised whether it is lawful to deviate
at all from one's instructions and for how long the
accused was technically an ambassador, since in some
cases the ambassador's duty is to convey a communication to a foreign power and in others to bring one
back. Take for example the case of Heius, who gave
evidence against Verres after performing his duties
as ambassador. But in such cases the most important
question turns on the nature of the deed complained
of Next come cases of action contrary to the interests
of the state. In these we meet with legal quibbles
as to what is the meaning of and whether the action of
the accused was injurious or profitable, or whether
the interests of the state suffered at his hands or
merely on his account but the most important
question is that of fact. There are also cases of
ingratitude; in these we raise the question whether
the accused has really received any kindness. It is
only rarely that the fact can be denied, as denial is
in itself a sign of ingratitude. But there are the
further questions as to the extent of the kindness
and whether it has been repaid. If it has not been
repaid, does this necessarily involve ingratitude
Was it in his power to repay Did he really owe
the return which was demanded of him What is
his intention Somewhat simpler are cases of
unjust divorce, a form of controversy which has this
peculiarity, that the accuser defends and the defendant accuses. Further there are cases where
a senator sets forth to the senate the reasons which
determine him to commit suicide, in which there is one
legal question, namely, whether a man who desires to
kill himself in order to escape the clutches of the
law ought to be prevented from so doing, while the
remaining questions are all concerned with quality.
There are also fictitious cases concerned with wills,
in which the only question raised is one of quality, as,
for instance, in the controversial theme quoted above,
where the philosopher, physician and orator all
claim the fourth share which their father had left
to the most worthy of his sons. The same is true
of cases where suitors of equal rank claim the
hand of an orphan and the question confronting her
relatives is which is the most suitable. I do not,
however, intend to discuss every possible theme, since fresh ones can always be invented, nor yet to
deal with all the questions to which they give rise,
since these vary with circumstances. But I cannot
help expressing my astonishment that Flavus, for
whose authority I have the highest respect, restricted
the range of quality to such an extent in the text-book
which he composed for the special guidance of the
schools. Quantity also, as I have already stated, falls as a
rule, though not always, under the head of quality,
whether it is concerned with measure or number.
Measure, however, sometimes consists in the valuation
of a deed with a view to determining the amount
of guilt or the amount of benefit involved, while, on
the other hand, it sometimes turns on a point of
law, when the dispute is under what law a man
is to be punished or rewarded. For example is a
ravisher to pay 10,000 sesterces because that is the
penalty appointed by law, or is he liable to capital
punishment as a murderer because his victim hanged
himself In such cases those who plead as if there
were a question between two laws, are wrong for
there is no dispute about the fine of 10,000,
since it is not claimed by the prosecution. The
point on which judgment has to be delivered is
whether the accused is guilty of causing his victim's
death. The same type of case will also bring
conjecture into play, when, for example, the question
in dispute is whether the accused shall be punished
with banishment for life or for five years. For the
question then is whether he caused his death
willingly or not. Again, there are questions concerned with numerical quantity which turn on a
point of law, such as the questions whether thirty rewards are due to Thrasybulus, or whether, when
two thieves have stolen a sum of money, they are
each to be required to refund fourfold or twofold.
But in these cases, too, valuation of the act is
necessary, and yet the point of law also turns on
quality. V. He who neither denies nor defends his act nor
asserts that it was of a different nature from that
alleged, must take his stand on some point of law
that tells in his favour, a form of defence which
generally turns on the legality of the action brought
against him. This question is not, however, as some
have held, always raised before the commencement
of the trial, like the elaborate deliberations of the
praetor when there is a doubt as to whether the
prosecutor has any legal standing, but frequently
comes up during the course of the actual trial. Such
discussions fall into two classes, according as the point
in dispute arises from an argument advanced by the
prosecution or from some prescription or demurrer
put forward by the defence. There have indeed
been some writers who have held that there is a
special prescriptive basis; but prescription is covered
by precisely the same questions that cover all other
laws. When the dispute turns on prescription, there
is no need to enquire into the facts of the case
itself. For example, a son puts forward a demurrer
against his father on the ground that his father has
forfeited his civil rights. The only point which has
to be decided is whether the demurrer can stand.
Still, wherever possible, we should attempt to create
a favourable impression in the judge as to the facts
of the case as well, since, if this be done, he will be
all the more disposed to give an indulgent hearing to our point of law for example, in actions taking
the form of a wager and arising out of interdicts,
even though the question is concerned solely with
actual possession, the question as to tile right to
possession not being raised, it will be desirable to
prove not merely that the property was actually in
our possession, but that it was ours to possess. On
tile other hand, the question more frequently turns
on intention. Take the law I deny that he is entitled to receive
whatever he chooses. I cannot put forward any
formal demurrer, but none the less I use the intention as against the letter of the law just as I should
use a demurrer. In both cases the basis is the same. Moreover every law either gives or takes away
punishes or commands, forbids or permits, and
involves a dispute either on its own account or on
account of another law, while the question which it
involves will turn either on the letter or the intention.
The letter is either clear or obscure or ambiguous.
And what I say with reference to laws will apply
equally to wills, agreements, contracts and every
form of document; nay, it will apply even to verbal
agreements. And since I have classified such cases
under four questions or bases, I will deal with each in
turn. 