I have now arrived at the point when I must
begin to deal with that portion of the art at which
those who have omitted the preceding stages generally commence. I can see, however, that certain
critics will attempt to obstruct my path at the very
outset for they will urge that eloquence can dispense with rules of this kind and, in smug satisfaction with themselves and the ordinary methods
and exercises of the schools, will laugh at me for
my pains; in which they will be only following the
example of certain professors of no small reputation.
One of these gentlemen, I believe, when asked to
define a figure and a thought, replied that he did not
know what they were, but that, if they had anything to do with the subject, they would be found in
his declamation. Another when asked whether he
was a follower of Theodorus or Apollodorus, replied, To do him justice, he could hardly have found a
neater way to avoid confessing his ignorance. These
persons, just because, thanks to their natural gifts,
they are regarded as brilliant performers and have,
as a matter of fact, uttered much that deserves to
be remembered, think that, while most men share
their careless habits, few come near them for talent. Consequently they make it their boast that they
speak on impulse and owe their success to their
native powers; they further assert that there is no
need of proof or careful marshalling of facts when
we are speaking on fictitious themes, but only of
some of those sounding epigrams, the expectation of
which has filled the lecture-room; and these they
say are best improvised on the spur of the moment. Further, owing to their contempt for method, when
they are meditating on some future effusion, they
spend whole days looking at the ceiling in the hope
that some magnificent inspiration may occur to
them, or rock their bodies to and fro, booming
inarticulately as if they had a trumpet inside them
and adapting their agitated movements, not to the
delivery of the words, but to their pursuit. Some
again settle on certain definite openings long before they have thought what they are going to say,
with a view to using them as pegs for subsequent
snatches of eloquence, and then after practising
their delivery first in silent thought and then
aloud for hours together, in utter desperation of
providing any connecting links, abandon them and take refuge in one formula after another, each no
less hackneyed and familiar than the last. The
least unreasonable of them devote their attention not to the actual cases, but to their purple
patches, in the composition of which they pay no
attention to the subject-matter, but fire off a series
of isolated thoughts just as they happen to come to
hand. The result is a speech which, being composed of disconnected passages having nothing in
common with each other, must necessarily lack
cohesion and can only be compared to a schoolboy's
notebook, in which he jots down any passages from
the declamations of others that have come in for a
word of praise. None the less they do occasionally
strike out some good things and some fine epigrams,
such as they make their boast. Why not slaves
and barbarians sometimes achieve the same effects,
and if we are to be satisfied with this sort of thing,
then good-bye to any theory of oratory. 