I think that enough has been said on the subject
of invention. For I have dealt not merely with the
methods by which we may instruct the judge, but
also with the means of appealing to his emotions.
But just as it is not sufficient for those who are
erecting a building merely to collect stone and timber
and other building materials, but skilled masons are
required to arrange and place them, so in speaking,
however abundant the matter may be, it will merely
form a confused heap unless arrangement be employed to reduce it to order and to give it connexion
and firmness of structure. Nor is it without good
reason that arrangement is treated as the second of
the five departments of oratory, since without it the
first is useless. For the fact that all the limbs of a
statue have been cast does not make it a statue they
must be put together; and if you were to interchange some one portion of our bodies or of those
of other animals with another, although the body
would be in possession of all the same members as before, you would none the less have produced
a monster. Again even a slight dislocation will
deprive a limb of its previous use and vigour, and
disorder in the ranks will impede the movements of an army. Nor can I regard as an error
the assertion that order is essential to the existence
of nature itself, for without order everything would
go to wrack and ruin. Similarly if oratory lack this
virtue, it cannot fail to be confused, but will be
like a ship drifting without a helmsman, will lack
cohesion, will fall into countless repetitions and
omissions, and, like a traveller who has lost his way
in unfamiliar country, will be guided solely by chance
without fixed purpose or the least idea either of
starting-point or goal. The whole of this book, therefore, will be devoted
to arrangement, an art the acquisition of which would
never have been such a rarity, had it been possible to
lay down general rules which would suit all subjects.
Put since cases in the courts have always presented
an infinite variety, and will continue to do so, and
since through all the centuries there has never been
found one single case which was exactly like any
other, the pleader must rely upon his sagacity, keep
his eyes open, exercise his powers of invention and
judgment and look to himself for advice. On the
other hand, I do not deny that there are some points
which are capable of demonstration and which
accordingly I shall be careful not to pass by. 