More important is the question whether rhetoric is to be regarded as one of the indifferent arts,
which in themselves deserve neither praise nor blame,
but are useful or the reverse according to the character of the artist; or whether it should, as not a few
even among philosophers hold, be considered as a
virtue. For my own part I regard the practice of rhetoric which so many have adopted in the past and still
follow to-day, as either no art at all, or, as the Greeks
call it, for I see numbers of speakers without the least pretension to method or literary training rushing headlong in the direction in which
hunger or their natural shamelessness calls them;
or else it is a bad art such as is styled For there have, I think, been many persons and
there are still some who have devoted their powers
of speaking to the destruction of their fellow-men. There is also an unprofitable imitation of art, a kind
of which is neither good nor bad, but
merely involves a useless expenditure of labour, reminding one of the man who shot a continuous
stream of vetch-seeds from a distance through the
eye of a needle, without ever missing his aim, and
was rewarded by Alexander, who was a witness of
the display, with the present of a bushel of vetch-seeds, a most appropriate reward. It is to such men
that I would compare those who spend their whole
time at the expense of much study and energy in
composing declamations, which they aim at making
as unreal as possible. The rhetoric on the other
hand, which I am endeavouring to establish and the
ideal of which I have in my mind's eye, that rhetoric
which befits a good man and is in a word the only
true rhetoric, will be a virtue. Philosophers arrive at this conclusion by a long chain of ingenious
arguments; but it appears to me to be perfectly
clear from the simpler proof of my own invention
which I will now proceed to set forth. The philosophers state the case as follows. If
self-consistency as to what should and should not
be done is an element of virtue and it is to this
quality that we give the name of prudence, the
same quality will be revealed as regards what should
be said and what should not be said, and if there are
virtues, of which nature has given us some rudimentary sparks, even before we were taught anything
about them, as for instance justice, of which there are
some traces even among peasants and barbarians, it
is clear that man has been so formed from the
beginning as to be able to plead on his own behalf,
not, it is true, with perfection, but yet sufficiently to
show that there are certain sparks of eloquence
implanted in us by nature. The same nature, however, is not to be found in those arts which have no
connexion with virtue. Consequently, since there are
two kinds of speech, the continuous which is called
rhetoric, and the concise which is called dialectic the
relation between which was regarded by Zeno as being
so intimate that he compared the latter to the closed
fist, the former to the open hand, even the art of
disputation will be a virtue. Consequently there can
be no doubt about oratory whose nature is so much
fairer and franker. I should like, however, to consider the point
more fully and explicitly by appealing to the
actual work of oratory. For how will the orator
succeed in panegyric unless he can distinguish between what is honourable and the reverse How can he urge a policy, unless he has a clear perception of what is expedient How can he plead in
the law-courts, if he is ignorant of the nature of
justice Again, does not oratory call for courage,
since it is often directed against the threats of
popular turbulence and frequently runs into peril
through incurring the hatred of the great, while
sometimes, as for instance in the trial of Milo, the
orator may have to speak in the midst of a crowd of
armed soldiers Consequently, if oratory be not a
virtue, perfection is beyond its grasp. If, on the
other hand, each living thing has its own peculiar
virtue, in which it excels the rest or, at any rate, the
majority I may instance the courage of the lion
and the swiftness of the horse, it may be regarded
as certain that the qualities in which man excels
the rest are, above all, reason and powers of speech.
Why, therefore, should we not consider that the
special virtue of man lies just as much in eloquence as in reason It will be with justice then
that Cicero makes Crassus say that and that Cicero himself
calls it a virtue in his letters to Brutus and in
other passages. it may be urged, No doubt; even a
robber may fight bravely without courage ceasing to
be a virtue; even a wicked slave may bear torture
without a groan, and we may still continue to regard
endurance of pain as worthy of praise. We can
point to many acts which are identical with those of
virtue, but spring from other sources. However,
what I have said here must suffice, as I have already
dealt with the question of the usefulness of oratory. 