Every artificial proof consists either of indications, arguments or examples. I am well aware that
many consider indications to form part of the arguments. My reasons for distinguishing them are twofold. In the first place indications as a rule come
under the head of inartificial proofs for a bloodstained garment, a shriek, a dark blotch and the like
are all evidence analogous to documentary or oral
evidence and rumours; they are not discovered by
the orator, but are given him with the case itself.
My second reason was that indications, if indubitable,
are not arguments, since they leave no room for
question, while arguments are only possible in
controversial matters. If on the other hand they
are doubtful, they are not arguments, but require
arguments to support them. The two first species into which artificial proofs may be divided are, as I have already said, those
which involve a conclusion and those which do not.
The former are those which cannot be otherwise and
are called by the Greeks, because they are
indications from which there is no getting away.
These however seem to me scarcely to come under
the rules of art. For where an indication is irrefutable, there can be no dispute as to facts. This
happens whenever there can be no doubt that something is being or has been done, or when it is impossible for it to be or have been done. In such cases
there can be no dispute as to the fact. This kind of
proof may be considered in connexion with past,
present or future time. For example, a woman who is
delivered of a child must have had intercourse with
a man, and the reference is to the past. When there
is a high wind at sea, there must be waves, and the
reference is to the present. When a man has received a wound in the heart, he is bound to die, and
the reference is to the future. Nor again can there
be a harvest where no seed has been sown, nor can
a man be at Rome when he is at Athens, nor have
been wounded by a sword when he has no scar.
Some have the same force when reversed a man
who breathes is alive, and a man who is alive breathes.
Some again cannot be reversed because he who
walks moves it does not follow that he who moves
walks. So too a woman, who has not been delivered
of a child, may have had intercourse with a man,
there may be waves without a high wind, and a man
may die without having received a wound in the
heart. Similarly seed may be sown without a harvest
resulting, a man, who was never at Athens, may never have been at Rome, and a man who has a scar
may not have received a sword-wound. There are other indications or that is
probabilities, as the Greeks call them, which do not
involve a necessary conclusion. These may not
be sufficient in themselves to remove doubt, but
may yet be of the greatest value when taken in
conjunction with other indications. The Latin
equivalent of the Greek is signum, a sign,
though some have called it indicium, an indication,
or vestigium, a trace. Such signs or indications
enable us to infer that something else has happened;
blood for instance may lead us to infer that a
murder has taken place. But bloodstains on a
garment may be the result of the slaying of a victim
at a sacrifice or of bleeding at the nose. Everyone
who has a bloodstain on his clothes is not necessarily a murderer. But although such an indication
may not amount to proof in itself, yet it may be
produced as evidence in conjunction with other
indications, such for instance as the fact that the
man with the bloodstain was the enemy of the
murdered man, had threatened him previously or
was in the same place with him. Add the indication
in question to these, and what was previously only a
suspicion may become a certainty. On the other
hand there are indications which may be made to
serve either party, such as livid spots, swellings
which may be regarded as symptoms either of
poisoning or of bad health, or a wound in the breast
which may be treated as a proof of murder or of
suicide. The force of such indications depends on the
amount of extraneous support which they receive. Hermagoras would include among such indications as do not involve a necessary conclusion, an argument such as the following, If we accept this
view, I fear that we shall come to treat all inferences
from a fact as indications. None the less such arguments are in practice treated exactly as if they were
indications. Nor do the Areopagites, when they
condemned a boy for plucking out the eyes of
quails, seem to have had anything else in their
mind than the consideration that such conduct
was an indication of a perverted character which
might prove hurtful to many, if he had been
allowed to grow up. So, too, the popularity of
Spurius Maelius and Marcus Manlius was regarded
as an indication that they were aiming at supreme
power. However, I fear that this line of reasoning
will carry us too far. For if it is an indication
of adultery that a woman bathes with men, the
fact that she revels with young men or even an
intimate friendship will also be indications of the
same offence. Again depilation, a voluptuous gait,
or womanish attire may be regarded as indications of
effeminacy and unmanliness by anyone who thinks
that such symptoms are the result of an immoral
character, just as blood is the result of a wound for
anything, that springs from the matter under investigation and comes to our notice, may properly
be called an indication. Similarly it is also usual
to give the names of signs to frequently observed
phenomena, such as prognostics of the weather which
we may illustrate by the Vergilian and If these phenomena are caused by the state of the
atmosphere, such an appellation is correct enough.
For if tile moon turns red owing to the wind, her
hue is certainly a sign of wind. And if, as the same
poet infers, the condensation and rarification of
the atmosphere causes that of which he speaks, we may agree in regarding it as
a sign. We may further note that great things are
sometimes indicated by trivial signs, witness the
Vergilian crow; that trivial events should be
indicated by signs of greater importance is of course
no matter for wonder. 