I shall now proceed to indicate what I think
should be the first subjects in which the rhetorician
should give instruction, and shall postpone for a
time our consideration of the art of rhetoric in the
narrow sense in which that term is popularly used.
For in my opinion it is most desirable that we
should commence with something resembling the
subjects already acquired under the teacher of
literature. Now there are three forms of narrative, without
counting the type used in actual legal cases. First
there is the fictitious narrative as we get it in
tragedies and poems, which is not merely not true
but has little resemblance to truth. Secondly, there
is the realistic narrative as presented by comedies,
which, though not true, has yet a certain verisimilitude. Thirdly there is the historical narrative, which
is an exposition of actual fact. Poetic narratives
are the property of the teacher of literature. The
rhetorician therefore should begin with the historical narrative, whose force is in proportion to its
truth. I will, however, postpone my demonstration
of what I regard as the best method of narration
till I come to deal with narration as required in the
courts. In the meantime, it will be sufficient to
urge that it should be neither dry nor jejune for
why spend so much labour over our studies if a bald
and naked statement of fact is regarded as sufficiently
expressive; nor on the other hand must it be
tortuous or revel in elaborate descriptions, such
as those in which so many are led to indulge
by a misguided imitation of poetic licence. Both
these extremes are faults; but that which springs
from poverty of wit is worse than that which is due to imaginative excess. For we cannot demand or
expect a perfect style from boys. But there is
greater promise in a certain luxuriance of mind, in
ambitious effort and an ardour that leads at times to
ideas bordering on the extravagant. I have no objection to a little exuberance in the young learner.
Nay, I would urge teachers too like nurses to be
careful to provide softer food for still undeveloped
minds and to suffer them to take their fill of the milk
of the more attractive studies. For the time being
the body may be somewhat plump, but maturer years
will reduce it to a sparer habit. Such plumpness
gives hope of strength; a child fully formed in
every limb is likely to grow up a puny weakling.
The young should be more daring and inventive
and should rejoice in their inventions, even though
correctness and severity are still to be acquired.
Exuberance is easily remedied, but barrenness is
incurable, be your efforts what they may. To my
mind the boy who gives least promise is one in
whom the critical faculty develops in advance of the
imagination. I like to see the first fruits of the mind
copious to excess and almost extravagant in their
profusion. The years as they pass will skim off
much of the froth, reason will file away many
excrescences, and something too will be removed
by what I may perhaps call the wear and tear of
life, so long as there is sufficient material to admit
of cutting and chiselling away. And there will
be sufficient, if only we do not draw the plate too
thin to begin with, so that it runs the risk of being
broken if the graver cut too deep. Those of my
readers who know their Cicero will not be surprised that I take this view for does he not say  We must, therefore, take especial care, above
all where boys are concerned, to avoid a dry
teacher, even as we avoid a dry and arid soil for
plants that are still young and tender. For with
such a teacher their growth is stunted and their
eyes are turned earthwards, and they are afraid to
rise above the level of daily speech. Their leanness
is regarded as a sign of health and their weakness as
a sign of sound judgment, and while they are content that their work should be devoid of faults they
fall into the fault of being devoid of merit. So let
not the ripeness of vintage come too soon nor the
must turn harsh while yet in the vat; thus it will
last for years and mellow with age. It is worth while too to warn the teacher that
undue severity in correcting faults is liable at times
to discourage a boy's mind from effort. He loses
hope and gives way to vexation, then last of all
comes to hate his work and fearing everything attempts nothing. This phenomenon is familiar to
farmers, who hold that the pruning-hook should not
be applied while the leaves are yet young, for they
seem to and to be unable
as yet to endure a scar. The instructor therefore
should be as kindly as possible at this stage; remedies, which are harsh by nature, must be applied with
a gentle hand some portions of the work must be
praised, others tolerated and others altered the
reason for the alterations should however be given,
and in some cases the master will illumine an
obscure passage by inserting something of his own. Occasionally again the teacher will find it useful to
dictate whole themes himself that the boy may
imitate them and for the time being love them as if
they were his own. But if a boy's composition is so
careless as not to admit of correction, I have found
it useful to give a fresh exposition of the theme and
to tell him to write it again, pointing out that he
was capable of doing better for there is nothing
like hope for making study a pleasure. Different
ages however demand different methods the task
set and the standard of correction must be proportioned to the pupil's strength. When boys ventured
on something that was too daring or exuberant, I
used to say to them that I approved of it for the
moment, but that the time would come when I
should no longer tolerate such a style. The result
was that the consciousness of ability filled them with
pleasure, without blinding their judgment. However, to return to the point from which I had
digressed. Written narratives should be composed
with the utmost care. It is useful at first, when a
child has just begun to speak, to make him repeat
what he has heard with a view to improving his
powers of speech; and for the same purpose, and
with good reason, I would make him tell his story
from the end back to the beginning or start in the
middle and go backwards or forwards, but only so
long as he is at his teacher's knee and while he is
incapable of greater effort and is beginning to connect words and things, thereby strengthening the
memory. Even so when he is beginning to understand the nature of correct and accurate speech,
extempore effusions, improvised without waiting
for thought to supply the matter or a moment's hesitation before rising to the feet, must not be permitted they proceed from a passion for display that
would do credit to a common mountebank. Such
proceedings fill ignorant parents with senseless pride,
while the boys themselves lose all respect for their
work, adopt a conceited bearing, and acquire the
habit of speaking in the worst style and actually practising their faults, while they develop an arrogant conviction of their own talents which often proves fatal
even to the most genuine proficiency. There will be
a special time for acquiring fluency of speech and I
shall not pass the subject by unnoticed. For the meantime it will suffice if a boy, by dint of taking pains and
working as hard as his age will permit, manages to
produce something worthy of approval. Let him get
used to this until it becomes a second nature. It is
only he who learns to speak correctly before he can
speak with rapidity who will reach the heights that
are our goal or the levels immediately below them. To narratives is annexed the task of refuting and
confirming them, styled anaskeue and kataskeue, from
which no little advantage may be derived. This may
be done not merely in connexion with fiction and
stories transmitted by the poets, but with the actual
records of history as well. For instance we may discuss the credibility of the story that a raven settled
on the head of Valerius in the midst of a combat and
with its wings and beak struck the eyes of the Gaul
who was his adversary, and a quantity of arguments
may be produced on either side or we may discuss
the tradition that Scipio was begotten by a serpent,
or that Romulus was suckled by the she-wolf, or the
story of Numa and Egeria. As regards Greek history, it allows itself something very like poetic licence. Again the time and place of some particular occurrence and sometimes even the persons concerned often provide matter for discussion Livy for
instance is frequently in doubt as to what actually
occurred and historians often disagree. From this our pupil will begin to proceed to more
important themes, such as the praise of famous men
and the denunciation of the wicked. Such tasks are
profitable in more than one respect. The mind is
exercised by the variety and multiplicity of the subject matter, while the character is moulded by the
contemplation of virtue and vice. Further wide
knowledge of facts is thus acquired, from which examples may be drawn if circumstances so demand,
such illustrations being of the utmost value in every
kind of case. It is but a step from this to practice
in the comparison of the respective merits of two
characters. This is of course a very similar theme
to the preceding, but involves a duplication of the
subject matter and deals not merely with the nature
of virtues and vices, but with their degree as well.
But the method to be followed in panegyric and invective will be dealt with in its proper place, as it
forms the third department of rhetoric. As to commonplaces I refer to those in which
we denounce vices themselves such as adultery,
gambling or profligacy without attacking particular persons, they come straight from the courts
and, if we add the name of the defendant, amount
to actual accusations. As a rule, however, the
general character of a commonplace is usually
given a special turn for instance we make our
adulterer blind, our gambler poor and our profligate
far advanced in years. Sometimes too they entail defence for we may speak on behalf of luxury or
love, while a pimp or a parasite may be defended in
such a way that we appeal as counsel not for the
character itself, but to rebut some specific charge
that is brought against him. Theses on the other hand are concerned with
the comparison of things and involve questions such
as or These provide the most attractive
and copious practice in the art of speaking, and are
most useful whether we have an eye to the duties
of deliberative oratory or the arguments of the
courts. For instance Cicero in his pro Murena deals
very fully with the second of the two problems
mentioned above. Other theses too belong entirely
to the deliberative class of oratory, as for instance
the questions as to or Put such discussions into
the mouths of specific persons and they become
deliberative declamations at once. My own teachers used to prepare us for conjectural cases by a form of exercise which was at once
useful and attractive they made us discuss and
develop questions such as or and the like. In these exercises our aim
was to discover the intention implied, a question
which frequently occurs in controversial declamations.
Such themes may perhaps be regarded as a kind of
chria or moral essay. That certain topics such as the question as to whether we should always believe a witness or
whether we should rely on circumstantial evidence,
are part and parcel of actual forensic pleading is so
obvious that certain speakers, men too who have
held civil office with no small distinction, have
written out passages dealing with such themes, committed them to memory and kept them ready for
immediate use, with a view to employing them when
occasion arose as a species of ornament to be inserted
into their extempore speeches. This practice
for I am not going to postpone expressing my judgment on itI used to regard a confession of extreme weakness. For how can such men find appropriate arguments in the course of actual cases which
continually present new and different features
How can they answer the points that their opponents
may bring up how deal a rapid counterstroke in
debate or cross-examine a witness if, even in those
matters which are of common occurrence and crop
up in the majority of cases, they cannot give expression to the most familiar thoughts except in words
prepared so far in advance. And when they produce
the same passage in a number of different cases, they
must come to loathe it like food that has grown cold
or stale, and they can hardly avoid a feeling of shame
at displaying this miserable piece of furniture to an
audience whose memory must have detected it so
many times already like the furniture of the
ostentatious poor, it is sure to shew signs of wear
through being used for such a variety of different
purposes. Also it must be remembered that there
is hardly a single commonplace of such universal
application that it will fit any actual case, unless
some special link is provided to connect it with the subject otherwise it will seem to have been
tacked on to the speech, not interwoven in its
texture, either because it is out of keeping with the
circumstances or like most of its kind is inappropriately
employed not because it is wanted, but because it is
ready for use. Some speakers, for example, introduce
the most long-winded commonplaces just for the sake
of the sentiments they contain, whereas rightly the
sentiments should spring from the context. Such
disquisitions are at once ornamental and useful, only if
they arise from the nature of the case. But the most
finished eloquence, unless it tend to the winning of
the case, is to say the least superfluous and may even
defeat its own purpose. However I must bring this
digression to a close. The praise or denunciation of laws requires greater
powers; indeed they should almost be equal to the
most serious tasks of rhetoric. The answer to the
question as to whether this exercise is more nearly
related to deliberative or controversial oratory
depends on custom and law and consequently varies
in different states. Among the Greeks the proposer
of a law was called upon to set forth his case before
a judge, while in Rome it was the custom to urge
the acceptance or rejection of a law before the public
assembly. But in any case the arguments advanced
in such cases are few in number and of a definite
type. For there are only three kinds of law, sacred,
public and private. This division is of rhetorical value
chiefly when a law is to be praised. For example the
orator may advance from praise to praise by a series of
gradations, praising an enactment first because it is
law, secondly because it is public, and, finally, designed
for the support of religion. As regards the questions which generally arise, they are common to all cases. Doubts may be raised as to whether the mover is
legally in a position to propose a law, as happened in
the case of Publius Clodius, whose appointment as
tribune of the plebs was alleged to be unconstitutional. Or the legality of the proposal itself may
be impugned in various ways; it may for instance be
urged that the law was not promulgated within
seventeen days, or was proposed, or is being proposed on an improper day, or in defiance of the
tribunicial veto or the auspices or any other legal
obstacle, or again that it is contrary to some existing law. But such points are not suitable to
elementary rhetorical exercises, which are not concerned with persons, times or particular cases.
Other subjects, whether the dispute be real or fictitious, are generally treated on the following lines. The fault must lie either in the words or the
matter. As regards the words, the question will
be whether they are sufficiently clear or contain
some ambiguity, and as regards the matter whether
the law is consistent with itself or should be retrospective or apply to special individuals. The point
however which is most commonly raised is the
question whether the law is right or expedient. I
am well aware that many rhetoricians introduce a
number of sub-divisions in connexion with this latter
enquiry. I however include under the term right
all such qualities as justice, piety and religion.
Justice is however usually discussed under various
aspects. A question may be raised about the acts
with which the law is concerned, as to whether they deserve punishment or reward or as to the degree of
punishment or reward that should be assigned, since
excess in either direction is open to criticism. Again
expediency is sometimes determined by the nature
of things, sometimes by the circumstances of the time.
Another common subject of controversy is whether
a law can be enforced, while one must not shut one's
eyes to the fact that exception is sometimes taken
to laws in their entirety, but sometimes only in
part, examples of both forms of criticism being
found in famous speeches. I am well aware, too,
that there are laws which are not proposed with
a view to perpetuity, but are concerned with temporary honours or commands, such as the lex Manilia
which is the subject of one of Cicero's speeches.
This however is not the place for instructions on
this topic, since they depend on the special circumstances of the matters under discussion, not on their
general characteristics. Such were the subjects on which the ancients as
a rule exercised their powers of speaking, though
they called in the assistance of the logicians as well
to teach them the theory of argument. For it is
generally agreed that the declamation of fictitious
themes in imitation of the questions that arise in
the law courts or deliberative assemblies came into
vogue among the Greeks about the time of Demetrius of Phalerum. Whether this type of exercise was actually invented by him I have failed to
discover, as I have acknowledged in another work.
But not even those who most strongly assert his
claim to be the inventor, can produce any adequate
authority in support of their opinion. As regards
Latin teachers of rhetoric, of whom Plotius was the most famous, Cicero informs us that they came into
existence towards the end of the age of Crassus. 