There are special rules which must be observed both by speakers and writers. Language is
based on reason, antiquity, authority and usage.
Reason finds its chief support in analogy and sometimes in etymology. As for antiquity, it is commended to us by the possession of a certain majesty, I
might almost say sanctity. Authority as a rule we
derive from orators and historians. For poets, owing
to the necessities of metre, are allowed a certain
licence except in cases where they deliberately
choose one of two expressions, when both are metrically possible, as for instance in imo de stirpe recisum
and aeriae quo congessere palumbes or silice in nuda and the like. The judgment of a supreme orator
is placed on the same level as reason, and even error
brings no disgrace, if it result from treading in the
footsteps of such distinguished guides. Usage
however is the surest pilot in speaking, and we
should treat language as currency minted with
the public stamp. But in all these cases we have
need of a critical judgment, especially as regards
analogy a Greek term for which a Latin equivalent
has been found in proportion. The essence of analogy
is the testing of all subjects of doubt by the application of some standard of comparison about which
there is no question, the proof that is to say of the
uncertain by reference to the certain. This can be
done in two different ways by comparing similar
words, paying special attention to their final syllables hence monosyllables are asserted to lie outside the
domain of analogy and by the study of diminutives. Comparison of nouns will reveal either their gender
or their declension in the first case, supposing the
question is raised as to whether junis be masculine
or feminine, panis will supply a standard of comparison in the second case, supposing we are in doubt
as to whether we should say hac domu or hac domo,
domuum or domorum, the standard of comparison will
be found in words such as anus or manus. Diminutives
merely reveal the gender for instance, to return to
a word previously used as an illustration, funiculus
proves thatfunis is masculine. The same standard
may be applied in the case of verbs. For instance
if it should be asserted that the middle syllable of
fervere is short, we can prove this to be an error,
because all verbs which in the indicative terminate
in -eo, make the middle syllable of the infinitive
long, if that syllable contain an e take as examples
such verbs as prandeo, pendeo, spondeo with infinitives
prandre, pendre, spondre. Those verbs, however,
which terminate in -o alone, if they form the infinitive in e, have the e short; compare lego, dico, curro,
with the infinitives, legre, dicre, currre. I admit
that in Lucilius we find But with all due respect to so learned a man, if he
regards fervit as on the same footing as currit and
legit, we shall say fervo as we say lego and curro
but such a form has never yet come to my ears. But this is not a true comparison for fervit resembles servit, and on this analogy we should say
fervire like servire. It is also possible in certain
cases to discover the present indicative of a verb from
the study of its other tenses. I remember, for instance, refuting certain scholars who criticised me for
using the word pepigi for, although they admitted
that it had been used by some of the best authors,
they asserted that it was an irrational form because
the present indicative paciscor, being passive in
form, made pactus sum as its perfect. I in addition
to quoting the authority of orators and historians
maintained that I was also supported by analogy.
For when I found ni ita pacunt in the Twelve Tables,
I noted that cadunt provided a parallel it was clear
therefore that the present indicative, though now
obsolete, was paco on the analogy of cado, and it
was further obvious that we say pepigi for just the
same reason that we say cecidi. But we must
remember that analogy cannot be universally applied,
as it is often inconsistent with itself. It is true
indeed that scholars have attempted to justify certain
apparent anomalies for example, when it is noted
to what an extent lepus and lupus, which resemble
each other closely in the nominative, differ in the
plural and in the other cases, they reply that they
are not true parallels, since lepus is epicene, while
lupus is masculine, although Varro in the book in
which he narrates the origins of Rome, writes lupus
femina, following the precedent of Ennius and
Fabius Pictor. The same scholars, however, when
asked why aper became apri in the genitive, but pater
patris, asserted that aper was an absolute, pater
a relative noun. Further since both words derive
from the Greek, they took refuge in the fact that provides a parallel to patris and to apri. But how will they evade the difficulty
that feminine nouns whose nominative singular
ends in -us never make the genitive end in -ris,
and yet the genitive of Venus is Veneris again
nouns ending in -es have various genitive terminations, but never end in -ris, but yet we have
no choice but to make the genitive of Ceres Cereris Again what of those words which, although identical in the form of the nominative or present indicative, develop the utmost variety in their inflections.
Thus from Alba we get both Albanus and Albensis,
from volo both volui and volavi. Analogy itself
admits that verbs whose present indicative ends in
-o have a great variety of perfect formations, as
for instance cado cecidi, spondeo spopondi, pingo pinxi,
lego legi, pono posui, fiango fregi, laudo laudavi. For
analogy was not sent down from heaven at the
creation of mankind to frame the rules of language,
but was discovered after they began to speak and to
note the terminations of words used in speech. It
is therefore based not on reason but on example,
nor is it a law of language, but rather a practice
which is observed, being in fact the offspring of
usage. Some scholars, however, are so perverse and
obstinate in their passion for analogy, that they say
audaciter in preference to audacter, the form preferred
by all orators, and emicavit for emicuit, and conire
for coire. We may permit them to say audivisse,
scivisse, tribunale and faciliter, nor will we deprive
them of frugalis as an alternative for frugi for
from what else can frugalitas be formed They may
also be allowed to point out that phrases such as
centum milia nummum and fidem deum involve a double solecism, since they change both case and
number. Of course we were in blank ignorance
of the fact and were not simply conforming to usage
and the demands of elegance, as in the numerous
cases, with which Cicero deals magnificently, as
always, in his Orator. Augustus again in his letters
to Gaius Caesar corrects him for preferring calidus
to caldus, not on the ground that the former is not
Latin, but because it is unpleasing and as he himself
puts it in Greek affected. Some hold
that this is just a question of or correctness
of speech, a subject to which I am far from being
indifferent. For what can be more necessary than
that we should speak correctly Nay, I even think
that, as far as possible, we should cling to correct
forms and resist all tendencies to change. But to
attempt to retain forms long obsolete and extinct
is sheer impertinence and ostentatious pedantry. I would suggest that the ripe scholar, who says without the aspirate and with a long e for it comes
from avre and uses calefacere and conservavisse in
preference to the usual forms, should also add face,
dice and the like to his vocabulary. His way is the
right way. Who doubts it But there is an easier
and more frequented path close by. There is,
however, nothing which annoys me more than their
habit not merely of inferring the nominative from
the oblique cases, but of actually altering it. For
instance in ebur and robur, the forms regularly used
both in writing and speech by the best authors,
these gentlemen change their second syllable to o,
because their genitives are roboris and eboris, and because sulpur and guttur keep the u in the genitive. So
too femur and iecur give rise to similar controversy. Their proceedings are just as arbitrary as if they
were to substitute an o in the genitives of sulpur
and guttur on the analogy of eboris and roboris.
Thus Antonius Gnipho while admitting robur, ebur
and even marmur to be correct, would have their
plurals to be ebura, robura and marnura. If they
would only pay attention to the affinities existing
between letters, they would realize that robur makes
its genitive roboris in precisely the same way that
limes, miles, iudex and uindex make their genitives
militis, limitis, iudicis and uindicis, not to mention other
words to which I have already referred. Do not nouns
which are similar in the nominative show, as I have
already observed, quite different terminations in the
oblique eases Compare uirgo and Iuno, lusus and
fusus, caspis and puppis and a thousand others.
Again some nouns are not used in the plural, while
others are not used in the singular, some are indeclinable, while others, like Jupiter, in the oblique
cases entirely abandon the form of the nominative. The same is true of verbs for instance fero disappears in the perfect and subsequent tenses. Nor
does it matter greatly whether such forms are nonexistent or too harsh to use. For what is the genitive singular of progenies or the genitive plural of spes
Or how will quire and ruere form a perfect passive or
passive participles. Why should I mention other
words when it is even doubtful whether the genitive
of senatus is senati or senatus In view of what I
have said, it seems to me that the remark, that it
is one thing to speak Latin and another to speak
grammar, was far from unhappy. So much for
analogy, of which I have said more than enough. Etymology inquires into the origin of words, and was called notation by Cicero, on the ground that
the term used by Aristotle is which may
be translated by nota. A literal rendering of would be ueriloquium, a form which even Cicero, its
inventor, shrinks from using. Some again, with an
eye to the meaning of the word, call it origination.
Etymology is sometimes of the utmost use, whenever the word under discussion needs interpretation. For instance Marcus Caelius wishes to prove that he
is homo frugi, not because he is abstemious for he
could not even pretend to be that, but because he
is useful to many, that is fructuosus, from which
frugalitas is derived. Consequently we find room
for etymology when we are concerned with definitions. Sometimes again this science attempts to
distinguish between correct forms and barbarisms, as
for instance when we are discussing whether we
should call Sicily Triquetra or Triquedra, or say
meridies or medidies, not to mention other words
which depend on current usage. Such a science
demands profound erudition, whether we are dealing with the large number of words which are
derived from the Greek, more especially those
inflected according to the practice of the Aeolic
dialect, the form of Greek which most nearly
resembles Latin; or are using ancient historians as
a basis for inquiry into the origin of names of men,
places, nations and cities. For instance what is the
origin of names such as Brutus, Publicola, or Pythicus
Why do we speak of Latium, Italia or Beneventum
What is the reason for employing such names as
Capitolium, collis Quirinalis or Argietum I now turn to minor points concerning which
enthusiasts for etymology give themselves an infinity of trouble, restoring to their true form words
which have become slightly altered the methods
which they employ are varied and manifold they
shorten them or lengthen them, add, remove, or
interchange letters and syllables as the case may be.
As a result perverseness of judgment leads to the
most hideous absurdities. I am ready to admit that
consul may be derived from consulere in the sense of
consulting or judging; for the ancients used consulere in the latter sense, and it still survives in the
phrase rogat boni consulas, that is bonum iudices, Again senatus may well be derived from old
age for the senators are called 
I concur in the derivations assigned to rex rector
to say nothing of many other words where there
can be no doubt, and do not refuse to accept those
suggested for tegula, regula and the like let classis
be from calare call out, summon, lepus be a contraction of levipes and vulpes of volipes. But are we
also to admit the derivation of certain words from
their opposites, and accept lucus a non lucendo, since
a grove is dark with shade, ludus in the sense of
school as being so called because it is quite the
reverse of and Dis, Ditis from diues, because
Pluto is far from being rich Are we to assent to
the view that homo is derived from humus, because
man sprang from the earth, as though all other
living things had not the same origin or as if
primitive man gave the earth a name before giving
one to himself Or again can verbum be derived
from aer verheratus,  Let us go a
little further and we shall find that stella is believed
to be still luminis a derivation
whose author is so famous in literature that it would be unkind to mention his name in connexion with a
point where he comes in for censure. But those
who collected such derivations in book form, put
their names on the title page; and Gavius thought
himself a perfect genius when he identified caelibes, with caelites, on the ground
that they are free from a heavy load of care, and
supported this opinion by a Greek analogy for he
asserted that had a precisely
similar origin. Modestus is not his inferior in
inventive power for he asserts that caelibes, that is
to say unmarried men, are so called because Saturn
cut off the genital organs of Caelus. Aelius asserts
that pituita, is so called quia petat uitam,
because it attacks life. But we may pardon anyone
after the example set by Varro. For he tried to
persuade Cicero, to whom he dedicated his work,
that a field was called eager because something is
done in it agitur, and jackdaws graculos because
they fly in flocks gregatim, in spite of the obvious
fact that the first word is derived from the Greek,
the latter from the cry of the bird in question. But Varro had such a passion for derivations that he
derived the name merula from mera
uolans on the ground that it flies alone Some
scholars do not hesitate to have recourse to etymology
for the origin of every word, deriving names such as
Rufus or Longus from the appearance of their
possessor, verbs such as strepere or murmurare from
the sounds which they represent, and even extending this practice to certain derivatives, making
uelox for instance find its origin in uelocitas, as well
as to compounds and the like now although such
words doubtless have an origin, no special science is required to detect it, since it is only doubtful cases
that demand the intervention of the etymologist. Archaic words not only enjoy the patronage of
distinguished authors, but also give style a certain
majesty and charm. For they have the authority of
age behind them, and for the very reason that they
have fallen into desuetude, produce an attractive
effect not unlike that of novelty. But such words
must be used sparingly and must not thrust themselves upon our notice, since there is nothing more
tiresome than affectation, nor above all must they be
drawn from remote and forgotten ages I refer to
words such as topper, antegerio, exanclare, prosapia, and the language of the Salian Hymns now scarcely
understood by its own priests. Religion, it is true,
forbids us to alter the words of these hymns and
we must treat them as sacred things. But what a
faulty thing is speech, whose prime virtue is clearness, if it requires an interpreter to make its meaning
plain Consequently in the case of old words the
best will be those that are newest, just as in the
case of new words the best will be the oldest. The same arguments apply to authority. For
although the use of words transmitted to us by the
best authors may seem to preclude the possibility
of error, it is important to notice not merely what
they said, but what words they succeeded in sanctioning. For no one to-day would introduce words such
as tuburchinabunidus, or lurchinabundus, although they have the authority of
Cato; nor make lodices, masculine,
though Pollio preferred that gender; nor say gladiola, though Messala used this plural, nor parricidatus for parricide, a form which can
scarcely be tolerated even in Caelius, nor will Calvus
persuade me to speak of collos, Indeed,
were these authors alive to-day, they would never
use such words. Usage remains to be discussed. For it would be
almost laughable to prefer the language of the
past to that of the present day, and what is ancient
speech but ancient usage of speaking But even
here the critical faculty is necessary, and we must
make up our minds what we mean by usage. If it
be defined merely as the practice of the majority,
we shall have a very dangerous rule affecting not
merely style but life as well, a far more serious
matter. For where is so much good to be found that
what is right should please the majority The
practices of depilation, of dressing the hair in
tiers, or of drinking to excess at the baths, although
they may have thrust their way into society, cannot claim the support of usage, since there is something to blame in all of them although we have
usage on our side when we bathe or have our
hair cut or take our meals together. So too in
speech we must not accept as a rule of language
words and phrases that have become a vicious habit
with a number of persons. To say nothing of the
language of the uneducated, we are all of us well
aware that whole theatres and the entire crowd of
spectators will often commit barbarisms in the cries
which they utter as one man. I will therefore define
usage in speech as the agreed practice of educated
men, just as where our way of life is concerned I
should define it as the agreed practice of all good
men. 