As soon as the boy has learned to read and write without difficulty, it is the turn for the teacher
of literature. My words apply equally to Greek and
Latin masters, though I prefer that a start should
be made with a Greek in either case the method
is the same. This profession may be most briefly
considered under two heads, the art of speaking
correctly and the interpretation of the poets; but
there is more beneath the surface than meets the
eye. For the art of writing is combined with that of
speaking, and correct reading precedes interpretation, while in each of these cases criticism has its
work to perform. The old school of teachers indeed
carried their criticism so far that they were not
content with obelising lines or rejecting books whose
titles they regarded as spurious, as though they
were expelling a supposititious child from the family
circle, but also drew up a canon of authors, from
which some were omitted altogether. Nor is it
sufficient to have read the poets only; every kind of
writer must be carefully studied, not merely for the
subject matter, but for the vocabulary; for words
often acquire authority from their use by a particular
author. Nor can such training be regarded as complete if it stop short of music, for the teacher of
literature has to speak of metre and rhythm nor
again if he be ignorant of astronomy, can he understand the poets; for they, to mention no further points,
frequently give their indications of time by reference
to the rising and setting of the stars. Ignorance of
philosophy is an equal drawback, since there are
numerous passages in almost every poem based on
the most intricate questions of natural philosophy,
while among the Greeks we have Empedocles and
among our own poets Varro and Lucretius, all of whom have expounded their philosophies in verse. No small powers of eloquence also are required to
enable the teacher to speak appropriately and
fluently on the various points which have just been
mentioned. For this reason those who criticise the
art of teaching literature as trivial and lacking in
substance put themselves out of court. Unless the
foundations of oratory are well and truly laid by
the teaching of literature, the superstructure will
collapse. The study of literature is a necessity for
boys and the delight of old age, the sweet companion of our privacy and the sole branch of study
which has more solid substance than display. The elementary stages of the teaching of literature must not therefore be despised as trivial. It is
of course an easy task to point out the difference
between vowels and consonants, and to subdivide the
latter into semivowels and mutes. But as the pupil
gradually approaches the inner shrine of the sacred
place, he will come to realise the intricacy of the subject, an intricacy calculated not merely to sharpen the
wits of a boy, but to exercise even the most profound
knowledge and erudition. It is not every ear that
can appreciate the correct sound of the different
letters. It is fully as hard as to distinguish the
different notes in music. But all teachers of literature will condescend to such minutiae they
will discuss for instance whether certain necessary
letters are absent from the alphabet, not indeed
when we are writing Greek words for then we
borrow two letters from them, but in the case of
genuine Latin words for example in words such as
seruus and uulgus we feel the lack of the Aeolic
digamma; there is also a sound intermediate between u and i, for we do not pronounce optimum as we do opimum, while in here the sound is neither exactly e or i. Again there is the question whether certain letters
are not superfluous, not to mention the mark of the
aspirate, to which, if it is required at all, there
should be a corresponding symbol to indicate the
opposite for instance k, which is also used as an
abbreviation for certain nouns, and q, which, though
slanted slightly more by us, resembles both in sound
and shape the Greek koppa, now used by the Greeks
solely as a numerical sign there is also x, the last
letter of our own alphabet, which we could dispense
with as easily as with psi. Again the teacher of
literature will have to determine whether certain
vowels have not been consonantalised. For instance
iam and etiam are both spelt with an i, uos and tuos
both with a u. Vowels, however, when joined as
vowels, either make one long vowel compare the
obsolete method of indicating a long vowel by
doubling it as the equivalent of the circumflex,
or a diphthong, though some hold that even three
vowels can form a single syllable; this however is
only possible if one or more assume the role of
consonants. He will also inquire why it is that
there are two vowels which may be repeated, while
a consonant can only be followed and modified by
a different consonant. But i can follow i for
coniicit is derived from iacit so too does u, witness the modern spelling of seruus and uulgus. He
should also know that Cicero preferred to write
aiio and Maaiiam with a double i; in that case one of them is consonantalised. A boy therefore must
learn both the peculiarities and the common characteristics of letters and must know how they are
related to each other. Nor must he be surprised
that scabillum is formed from scamnus or that a
double-edged axe should be called bipennis from
pinnus,  for I would not have him fall into
the same error as those who, supposing this word to
be derived from his and pennae, think that it is a
metaphor from the wings of birds. He must not be content with knowing only those
changes introduced by conjugation and prefixes,
such as secat secuit, cadit excidit, caedit excdit, calcat
exculcat, to which might be added lotus from lauare
and again inlotus with a thousand others. He must
learn as well the changes that time has brought
about even in nominatives. For just as names like
Valesius and Fusius have become Valerius and Furius,
so arbos, labos, vapos and even clamos and lases
were the original forms. And this same letter s,
which has disappeared from these words, has itself
in some cases taken the place of another letter. For
our ancestors used to say mertare and pultare. They
also said fordeum and faedi, using f instead of the
aspirate as being a kindred letter. For the Greeks
unlike us aspirate f like their own phi, as Cicero
bears witness in the pro Fundanio, where he laughs at
a witness who is unable to pronounce the first letter
of that name. In some cases again we have substituted b for other letters, as with Burrus, Bruges,
and Belena. The same letter too has turned duellum
into bellum, and as a result some have ventured to
call the Duelii Belii. What of stlocus and stlites
What of the connexion between t and d, a connexion which makes it less surprising that on some of
the older buildings of Rome and certain famous
temples we should find the names Alexanter and
Cassantra What again of the interchange of o
and u, of which examples may be found in Hecoba,
notrix, Culcides and Pulixena, or to take purely Latin
words dederont and probaueront So too Odysseus,
which the Aeolian dialect turned into Ulysseus, has
been transformed by us into Ulixes. Similarly e in
certain cases held the place that is now occupied
by i, as in Menerua, leber, magester, and Dioue victore
in place of Dioui victori. It is sufficient for me to
give a mere indication as regards these points, for I
am not teaching, but merely advising those who
have got to teach. The next subject to which attention must be given is that of syllables, of which I will
speak briefly, when I come to deal with orthography. Following this the teacher concerned will note
the number and nature of the parts of speech,
although there is some dispute as to their number. Earlier writers, among them Aristotle himself and
Theodectes, hold that there are but three, verbs,
nouns and convictions. Their view was that the
force of language resided in the verbs, and the
matter in the nouns for the one is what we speak,
the other that which we speak about, while the
duty of the convinctions was to provide a link
between the nouns and the verbs. I know that
conjunction is the term in general use. But conviction
seems to me to be the more accurate translation of
the Greek Gradually the number was
increased by the philosophers, more especially by
the Stoics articles were first added to the convinctions, then prepositions to nouns appellations were added, then the pronoun and finally the participle,
which holds a middle position between the verb
and the noun. To the verb itself was added the
adverb. Our own language dispenses with the
articles, which are therefore distributed among the
other parts of speech. But interjections must be
added to those already mentioned. Others however follow good authority in asserting that there
are eight parts of speech. Among these I may
mention Aristarchus and in our own day Palaemon,
who classified the vocable or appellation as a species
of the genus noun. Those on the other hand who
distinguish between the noun and the vocable, make
nine parts of speech. But yet again there are
some who differentiate between the vocable and the
appellation, saying that the vocable indicates concrete
objects which can be seen and touched, such as a or while an appellation is something
imperceptible either to sight or touch or to both,
such as the or They
added also the asseveration, such as and the
derivative such as fasciatim. But of these classifications I do not approve. Whether we should translate by vocable or appellation, and whether
it should be regarded as a species of noun, I leave
to the decision of such as desire to express their
opinion it is a matter of no importance. Boys should begin by learning to decline nouns
and conjugate verbs otherwise they will never be
able to understand the next subject of study. This
admonition would be superfluous but for the fact
that most teachers, misled by a desire to show rapid
progress, begin with what should really come at the
end their passion for displaying their pupils' talents in connexion with the more imposing aspects of
their work serves but to delay progress and their
short cut to knowledge merely lengthens the
journey. And yet a teacher who has acquired
sufficient knowledge himself and is ready to teach
what he has learnedand such readiness is all too
rarewill not be content with stating that nouns
have three genders or with mentioning those which
are common to two or all three together. Nor
again shall I be in a hurry to regard it as a proof of
real diligence, if he points out that there are irregular nouns of the kind called epicene by the Greeks,
in which one gender implies both, or which in spite
of being feminine or neuter in form indicate males
or females respectively, as for instance Muraena
and Glycerium. A really keen and intelligent teacher
will inquire into the origin of names derived from
physical characteristics, such as Rufus or Longus,
whenever their meaning is obscure, as in the case of
Sulla, Burrus, Galba, Plautus, Pansa, Scaurus and the
like; of names derived from accidents of birth such
as Agrippa, Opiter, Cordus and Postumus, and again of
names given after birth such as Vopiscus. Then there
are names such as Cotta, Scipio, Laenas or Seranus,
which originated in various ways. It will also be found
that names are frequently derived from races, places
and many other causes. Further there are obsolete
slave-names such as Marcipor or Publipor derived
from the names of their owners. The teacher must
also inquire whether there is not room for a sixth case in Greek and a seventh in Latin. For when I
say the case is not a true
ablative in Latin nor a true dative in Greek. Again
if we turn to verbs, who is so ill-educated as not to
be familiar with their various kinds and qualities,
their different persons and numbers. Such subjects belong to the elementary school and the
rudiments of knowledge. Some, however, will
find points undetermined by inflexion somewhat
perplexing. For there are certain participles, about
which there may be doubts as to whether they are
really nouns or verbs, since their meaning varies
with their use, as for example lectum and sapiens, while there are other verbs which resemble nouns,
such as fraudator and nutritor. Again itur in antiquam
silvam is a peculiar usage. For there is no subject
to serve as a starting point fletur is a similar example.
The passive may be used in different ways as for
instance in and in Yet a third usage is found in urbs habitatur, whence
we get phrases such as campus curritur and mare navigatur. Pransus and potus have a meaning which does
not correspond to their form. And what of those
verbs which are only partially conjugated Some
as for instance fero even suffer an entire change in
the perfect. Others are used only in the third person, such as licet and piget, while some resemble
nouns tending to acquire an adverbial meaning; for
we say dictu and factu as we say noctu and diu,
since these words are participial though quite different
from dicto and facto. 