As regards the points to be observed in the
actual pleading, I have dealt with these in every
portion of this work, but there still remain a few on
which I must touch as being specially appropriate to
the present place, since they are concerned not so
much with the art of speaking as with the duties
of the advocate. Above all it is important that he
should never, like so many, be led by a desire to win
applause to neglect the interest of the actual case.
It is not always the duty of generals in the field to
lead their armies through flat and smiling country
it will often be necessary to cross rugged mountain
ranges, to storm cities placed on inaccessible cliffs or
rendered difficult of access by elaborate fortifications.
Similarly oratory will always be glad of the opportunity of manuvring in all its freedom and delighting the spectator by the deployment of its full
strength for conflict in the open field; but if it is
forced to enter the tortuous defiles of the law, or
dark places whence the truth has to be dragged
forth, it will not go prancing in front of the enemy's
lines nor launch its shafts of quivering and passionate
epigram of the fashion that is now so popular, but
will wage war by means of sap and mine and ambush
and all the tactics of secrecy. None of these
methods win applause during their actual execution
the reward comes after they have been carried to a
successful termination, when even the most ambitious will reap a richer recompense than they could ever
have secured by other means. For so soon as the
thunders of applause awakened among their admirers
by these affected declamatory displays have died
away, the glory of true virtue rises again with
renewed splendour, the judges do not conceal who
it is has moved them, the well-trained orator wins
their belief and oratory receives its only genuine
tribute, the praise accorded it when its task is done.
The old orators indeed used to conceal their eloquence, a method which is recommended by Marcus
Antonius, as a means of securing that the speaker's
words should carry conviction and of masking the
advocate's real designs. But the truth is that the
eloquence of those days was capable of concealment,
for it had not yet attained that splendour of diction
which makes it impossible to hide its light under a
bushel. Therefore artifice and stratagem should be
masked, since detection in such cases spells failure.
Thus far, and thus only, may eloquence hope to enjoy
the advantages of secrecy. But when we come to
consider the choice of words, the weight essential
to general reflexions and the elegance demanded by
figures, we are confronted by elements which must
either strike the attention or be condemned to nonexistence. But the very fact that they strike the
attention is a reason why they should not flaunt
themselves obtrusively. And, if we have to make
the choice, I should prefer that it should be the
cause, and not the orator, to which we award our
praise. Nevertheless, the true orator will achieve
the distinction of seeming to speak with all the
excellence that an excellent case deserves. One
thing may be regarded as certain, that no one can plead worse than he who wins applause despite the
disapproval meted out to his case. For the inevitable
conclusion is that the applause must have been
evoked by something having no connexion with the
case. Further, the true orator will not turn up his
nose at cases of minor importance on the ground of
their being beneath his dignity or as being likely
to detract from his reputation because the subject
matter does not allow his genius full scope. For the
strongest reason for undertaking a case is to be fund
in our duty towards our clients nay, we should even
desire the suits in which our friends are involved to
he as unimportant as possible, and remember that the
advocate who gives an adequate presentment to his
case, has spoken exceeding well. But there are so he who, even although the cases
which they have undertaken give but small scope for
eloquence, none the less trick it out with matter
drawn from without and, if all else fails, fill up the
gaps in their case with abuse of their opponents,
true if possible, but false if necessary, the sole consideration that weighs with them being that it affords
exercise for their talents and is likely to win applause
during its delivery. Such conduct seems to me so
unworthy of our perfect orator that, in my opinion,
he will not even bring true charges against his
opponents unless the case demand. For it is a
dog's eloquence, as Appius says, to undertake the
task of abusing one's opponent, and they who do so
should steel themselves in advance to the prospect
of being targets for like abuse themselves, since
those who adopt this style of pleading are frequently
attacked themselves, and there can at any rate be
no doubt that the litigant pays dearly for the violence of his advocate. But such faults are less serious than
that which lies deep in the soul itself, making the
evil speaker to differ from the evil doer only in
respect of opportunity. It is not uncommon for
the litigant to demand a base and inhuman gratification of his rancour, such as not a single man among
the audience will approve, for it is on revenge rather
than on protection that his heart is set. But in this,
as in a number of other points, it is the duty of the
orator to refuse to comply with his clients' desires.
For how can a man with the least degree of gentlemanly feeling consent to make a brutal attack merely
because another desires it And yet there are some
who take pleasure in directing their onslaughts
against their opponents' counsel as well, a practice
which, unless they have deserved such attacks, shows
an inhuman disregard of the duties incumbent on the
profession, and is not merely useless to the speaker
since he thereby gives his opponent the right to
reply in the same strain, but contrary to the
interests of his case, since it creates a hosthe and
antagonistic disposition in the advocates attacked,
whose eloquence, however feeble it may be, will be
redoubled by resentment at the insults to which
they have been subjected. Above all, it involves a
complete waste of one of the most valuable of an
orator's assets, namely that self-restraint which gives
weight and credit to his words, if he debases himself from an honest man into a snarling wrangler,
directing all his efforts not to win the goodwill of the
judge, but to gratify his client's spite. Often too
the attractions of freedom of speech will lure him
into a rashness of language perilous not merely to
the interests of the case, but to those of the speaker himself. It was not without good reason that Pericles used to pray that no word might occur to his
mind that could give offence to the people. But
what he felt with regard to the people, I feel with
regard to every audience, since they can cause just
as much harm to the orator as the people could
ever do to Pericles. For utterances which seemed
courageous at the moment of speaking, are called
foolish when it is found that they have given offence. In view of the tact that there is commonly a great
variety in the aims which pleaders set before themselves and that the diligence shown by some is
branded as tedious caution, while the readiness of
others is criticised as rashness, I think that this will
be an appropriate place to set forth my views as to
how the orator may strike the happy mean. He will
show all the diligence of which he is capable in his
pleading. For to plead worse than he might have
done, is not merely an indication of negligence, but
stamps him as a had man and a traitor, disloyal to the
cause which he has undertaken. Consequently he
must refuse to undertake more cases than he feels
he can manage. As far as possible he will deliver
only what he has written, and, if circumstances
permit, only what he has, as Demosthenes says,
carved into shape. Such a practice is possible in
first hearings and also in subsequent hearings such as
are granted in the public courts after an interval of
several days. On the other hand, when we have to
reply on the spot, it is impossible to prepare everything in fact for the less ready type of speaker, it
may, in the event of his opponents putting forward
arguments quite other than those which they were
expected to advance, be a positive drawback to have written anything. For it is only with reluctance
that such speakers will under such circumstances
consent to abandon what they have written, and
throughout their pleading keep looking back and
trying to discover whether any portion of their
manuscript can be saved from the wreck and interpolated into what they have to improvise. And if
they do make such interpolations, the result is a lack
of' cohesion which is betrayed not merely by the
gaping of the seams where the patch has been unskilfully inserted, but by the differences of style.
Consequently, the vigour of their eloquence will be
hampered and their thought will lack connexion, each
of which circumstances reacts unfavourably upon the
other, since what is written trammels the mind
instead of following its lead. Therefore, in such
pleadings we must, as the rustic adage says, For since the case turns on the
propounding and refutation of arguments, it is
always possible to write out what we propose to
advance on our own behalf, and similar preparation
is also possible with regard to the refutation of such
replies as are absolutely certain to be made by our
adversary for there are times when we have this
certainty. But with regard to all other portions of
our speech, the only preparation that is possible in
advance consists in a thorough knowledge of our
case, while there is a second precaution which may
be taken in court, consisting in giving our best
attention to our opponent's speech. On the other
hand, there is much that may be thought out in
advance and we may forearm our mind against all
possible emergencies, a course which is far safer
than writing, since a train of thought can easily be abandoned or diverted in a new direction. But
whether we have to improvise a reply, or are obliged
to speak extempore by some other reason, the orator
on whom training, study and practice have conferred
the gift of facility, will never regard himself as lost
or taken at hopeless disadvantage. He stands
armed for battle, ever ready for the fray, and his
eloquence will no more fail him in the courts than
speech will fail him in domestic affairs and the daily
concerns of life and he will never shirk his burden
for fear of failing to find words, provided he has time
to study his case for all other knowledge will always
be his at command. 