By a trope is meant the artistic alteration of
a word or phrase from its proper meaning to another.
This is a subject which has given rise to interminable disputes among the teachers of literature, who
have quarrelled no less violently with the philosophers than among themselves over the problem of
the genera and species into which tropes may be
divided, their number and their correct classification.
I propose to disregard such quibbles as in no wise
concern the training of an orator, and to proceed
to discuss those tropes which are most necessary and
meet with most general acceptance, contenting
myself merely with noting the fact that some tropes
are employed to help out our meaning and others to
adorn our style, that some arise from words used
properly and others from words used metaphorically,
and that the changes involved concern not merely
individual words, but also our thoughts and the
structure of our sentences. In view of these facts
I regard those writers as mistaken who have held
that tropes necessarily involved the substitution of
word for word. And I do not ignore the fact that as a rule the tropes employed to express our meaning
involve ornament as well, though the converse is not
the case, since there are some which are intended
solely for the purpose of embellishment. Let us begin, then, with the commonest and by far
the most beautiful of tropes, namely, metaphor, the
Greek term for our translatio. It is not merely so
natural a turn of speech that it is often employed unconsciously or by uneducated persons, but it is in itself
so attractive and elegant that however distinguished
the language in which it is embedded it shines forth
with a light that is all its own. For if it be correctly
and appropriately applied, it is quite impossible
for its effect to be commonplace, mean or unpleasing. It adds to the copiousness of language by the
interchange of words and by borrowing, and finally
succeeds in accomplishing the supremely difficult
task of providing a name for everything. A noun
or a verb is transferred from the place to which it
properly belongs to another where there is either no
literal term or the transferred is better than the literal.
We do this either because it is necessary or to make
our meaning clearer or, as I have already said, to produce a decorative effect. When it secures none of
these results, our metaphor will be out of place. As
an example of a necessary metaphor I may quote the
following usages in vogue with peasants when they
call a vinebud gemma, a gem what other term is
there which they could use, or speak of the crops
being thirsty or the fruit suffering. For the same
reason we speak of a hard or rough man, there being
no literal term for these temperaments. On the
other hand, when we say that a man is kindled to
anger or on fire with greed or that he has fallen into error, we do so to enhance our meaning. For none
of these things can be more literally described in its
own words than in those which we import from
elsewhere. But it is a purely ornamental metaphor
when we speak of brilliance of style, splendour of
birth, tempestuous public assemblies, thunderbolts of
eloquence, to which I may add the phrase employed
by Cicero in his defence of Milo where he speaks
of Clodius as the fountain, and in another place as
the fertile field and material of his client's glory. It
is even possible to express facts of a somewhat
unseemly character by a judicious use of metaphor,
as in the following passage On the whole metaphor is a shorter form of simile,
while there is this further difference, that in the
latter we compare some object to the thing which we
wish to describe, whereas in the former this object is
actually substituted for the thing. It is a comparison when I say that a man did something like a
lion, it is a metaphor when I say of him, He is a lion.
Metaphors fall into four classes. In the first we
substitute one living thing for another, as in the
passage where the poet, speaking of a charioteer,
says, or when Livy says that Scipio was continually
barked at by Cato. Secondly, inanimate things may
be substituted for inanimate, as in the Virgilian. or inanimate may be substituted for animate, as in or animate for inanimate, as in the following lines But, above all, effects of extraordinary sublimity are
produced when the theme is exalted by a bold and
almost hazardous metaphor and inanimate objects
are given life and action, as in the phrase or in the passage of Cicero, already quoted, where
he cries, Sometimes the effect is doubled, as in Virgil's. For both and are metaphors. These four kinds of
metaphor are further subdivided into a number of
species, such as transference from rational beings
to rational and from irrational to irrational and the
reverse, in which the method is the same, and
finally from the whole to its parts and from the
parts to the whole. But I am not now teaching
boys my readers are old enough to discover the
species for themselves when once they have been
given the genus. While a temperate and timely use of metaphor is a real adornment to style, on the other hand, its
frequent use serves merely to obscure our language
and weary our audience, while if we introduce them
in one continuous series, our language will become
allegorical and enigmatic. There are also certain
metaphors which fail from meanness, such as that
of which I spoke above or they may even be coarse. For it does not
follow that because Cicero was perfectly justified
in talking of when
he desired to indicate the foulness of certain
men, we can approve the following passage from
an ancient orator Indeed Cicero himself has demonstrated in the most admirable manner how important it is to avoid grossness in metaphor, such
as is revealed by the following examples, which he
quotes or He also points out that a metaphor
must not be too great for its subject or, as is more
frequently the case, too little, and that it must not
be inappropriate. Anyone who realises that these
are faults, will be able to detect instances of them
only too frequently. But excess in the use of metaphor is also a fault, more especially if they are of the
same species. Metaphors may also be harsh, that is,
far-fetched, as in phrases like or The worst errors of all, however, originate in the
fact that some authors regard it as permissible to
use even in prose any metaphors that are allowed to
poets, in spite of the fact that tile latter aim solely
at pleasing their readers and are compelled in many
cases to employ metaphor by sheer metrical necessity. For my own part I should not regard a phrase
like as admissible in
pleading, although it has the authority of Homer,
nor would I venture to say that winged creatures despite the fact that this
metaphor has been most effectively employed by
Virgil to describe the flight of bees and of Daedalus.1 For metaphor should always either occupy
a place already vacant, or if it fills the room of something else, should be more impressive than that
which it displaces. What I have said above applies perhaps with even
greater force to synecdoche. For while metaphor is
designed to move the feelings, give special distinction to things and place them vividly before
the eye, synecdoche has the power to give variety to
our language by making us realise many things
from one, the whole from a part, the genus from a
species, things which follow from things which have
preceded; or, on the other hand, the whole procedure may be reversed. It may, however, be more
freely employed by poets than by orators. For
while in prose it is perfectly correct to use macro,
the point, for the whole sword, and tectum, roof, for a
whole house, we may not employ puppis, stern, to
describe a ship, nor abies, fir, to describe planks;
and again, though ferrunm, the steel, may be used to
indicate a sword, quadrupes cannot be used in the sense of horse. It is where numbers are concerned
that synecdoche can be most freely employed in
prose. For example, Livy frequently says, when he means that the
Romans were victorious; on the other hand, Cicero
in a letter to Brutus says, when he is
speaking of himself alone. This form of trope is
not only a rhetorical ornament, but is frequently
employed in everyday speech. Some also apply the
term synecdoche when something is assumed which
has not actually been expressed, since one word is
then discovered from other words, as in the sentence, when such omission creates a blemish, it is called an
ellipse. For my own part, I prefer to regard this as
a figure, and shall therefore discuss it under that
head. Again, one thing may be suggested by
another, as in the line, from which we infer the approach of night. I am
not sure whether this is permissible to an orator
except in arguments, when it serves as an indication
of some fact. However, this has nothing to do with
the question of style. It is but a short step from synecdoche to metonymy,
which consists in the substitution of one name for
another, and, as Cicero tells us, is called hypallage
by the rhetoricians. These devices are employed to
indicate an invention by substituting the name of the inventor, or a possession by substituting the
name of the possessor. Virgil, for example, writes and Horace If, however, the process is reversed, the effect is
harsh. But it is important to enquire to what
extent tropes of this kind should be employed by
the orator. For though we often hear used for fire and to say vario Marte pugnatum est for is elegant and
idiomatic, while Venus is a more decent expression
than coitus, it would be too bold for the severe style
demanded in the courts to speak of Liber and Ceres
when we mean bread and wine. Again, while usage
permits us to substitute that which contains for that
which is contained, as in phrases such as or or the converse procedure would rarely be
ventured on by any save a poet take, for example,
the phrase It is, however, perhaps more permissible to describe
what is possessed by reference to its possessor, as,
for example, to say of a man whose estate is being
squandered, Of this
form there are innumerable species. For example,
we say and speak of when we mean
; again, we say that supplies have when they have been that a and not a has been
detected, and that a man possesses a knowledge of not of The type which
indicates cause by effect is common both in poets
and orators. As examples from poetry I may quote and The following type of trope has also some kinship
with synecdoch. For when I speak of a man's instead of his I use the plural for
the singular, but my aim is not to enable one thing
to be inferred from many for the sense is clear
enough, but I merely vary the form of the word.
Again, when I call a a I diverge a little from the truth, because gilding
forms only a part of the roof. But to follow out
these points is a task involving too much minute
detail even for a work whose aim is not the
training of an orator. Antonomasia, which substitutes something else for
a proper name, is very common in poets it may be
done in two ways by the substitution of an epithet
as equivalent to the name which it replaces, such as or by indicating the most
striking characteristics of an individual, as in the
phrase or from acts clearly indicating the individual, as in
the phrase, This form of trope is rare in oratory, but is occasionally employed, For although an orator would
not say or he will speak of
certain definite persons as while I should have no hesitation in speaking of
Scipio as or of Cicero as Cicero himself, at any rate, availed himself of this
licence, as, for example, in the following case where neither name is given, though both
are clearly understood. On the other hand, onomatopoea, that is to say, the
creation of a word, although regarded with the
highest approbation by the Greeks, is scarcely permissible to a Roman. It is true that many words
were created in this way by the original founders of
the language, who adapted them to suit the sensation
which they expressed. For instance, mugitus, lowing,
sibilus, a hiss, and murmur owe their origin to this
practice. But to-day we consider that all has been
done that can be done in this line, and do not venture
on fresh creations, in spite of the fact that many
of the words thus formed in antiquity are daily
becoming obsolete. Indeed, we scarcely permit ourselves to use new derivatives, so they are called,
which are formed in various ways from words in
common use, such as Sullaturit, or proscripturit, while laureati posies, for lauru coronati, are similar formations.      
         These facts make catachresis of which abuse is a
correct translation all the more necessary. By this
term is meant the practice of adapting the nearest
available term to describe something for which no
actual term exists, as in the line or as in the expression found in tragedy, The following examples are of a similar character.
Flasks are called acetabula, whatever they contain,
and caskets pyxides, of whatever material they are
made, while parricide includes the murder of a
mother or a brother. We must be careful to
distinguish between abuse and metaphor, since the
former is employed where there is no proper term
available, and the latter when there is another term
available. As for poets, they indulge in the abuse
of words even in cases where proper terms do exist,
and substitute words of somewhat similar meaning.
But this is rare in prose. Some, indeed, would give
the name of catachresis even to cases such as where
we call temerity valour or prodigality liberality.
I, however, cannot agree with them; for in these instances word is not substituted for word, but thing
for thing, since no one regards prodigality and liberality as meaning the same, but one man calls certain
actions liberal and another prodigal, although neither
for a moment doubts the difference between the two
qualities. There is but one of the tropes involving change of
meaning which remains to be discussed, namely,
metalepsis or transumption, which provides a transition
from one trope to another. It is if we except
comedy but rarely used in Latin, and is by no means
to be commended, though it is not infrequently
employed by the Greeks, who, for example, call the centaur and substitute the epithet swift for in referring to sharp-pointed
islands. But who would endure a Roman if he
called Verres sus or changed the name of Aelius
Catus to Aelius doctus It is the nature of metalepsis
to form a kind of intermediate step between the
term transferred and the thing to which it is transferred, having no meaning in itself, but merely
providing a transition. It is a trope with which to
claim acquaintance, rather than one which we are
ever likely to require to use. The commonest
example is the following cano is a synonym
for canto and canto for dico, therefore cano is a
synonym for dico, the intermediate step being provided by canto. We need not waste any more time
over it. I can see no use in it except, as I have
already said, in comedy. The remaining tropes are employed solely to
adorn and enhance our style without any reference
to the meaning. For the epithet, of which the correct
translation is appositum, though some call it sequens, is clearly an ornament. Poets employ it with special
frequency and freedom, since for them it is sufficient
that the epithet should suit the word to which it is
applied consequently we shall not blame them
when they speak of or But in oratory an epithet is redundant
unless it has some point. Now it will only have
point when it adds something to the meaning, as for
instance in the following But its decorative effect is greatest
when it is metaphorical, as in the phrases or The
epithet is generally made into a trope by the addition
of something to it, as when Virgil speaks of or But the nature
of this form of embellishment is such that, while
style is bare and inelegant without any epithets
at all, it is overloaded when a large number are
employed. For then it becomes long-winded and
cumbrous, in fact you might compare it to an army
with as many camp-followers as soldiers, an army, that
is to say, which has doubled its numbers without
doubling its strength. None the less, not merely
single epithets are employed, but we may find a
number of them together, as in the following passage
from Virgil Be this as it may, two epithets directly attached
to one noun are unbecoming even in verse. There
are some writers who refuse to regard an epithet as a
trope, on the ground that it involves no change. It is not always a trope, but if separated from the word to
which it belongs, it has a significance of its own and
forms an antonomasia. For if you say, it will
be an antonomasia, whereas, if you add the word the phrase will be an epithet. An epithet
therefore cannot stand by itself. Allegory, which is translated in Latin by inversio,
either presents one thing in words and another in
meaning, or else something absolutely opposed to the
meaning of the words. The first type is generally produced by a series of metaphors. Take as an example and the rest of the ode, in which Horace represents
the state under the semblance of a ship, the civil
wars as tempests, and peace and good-will as the
haven. Such, again, is the claim of Lucretius and such again the passage where Virgil says, On the other hand, in the Bucolics he introduces
an allegory without any metaphor For in this passage, with the exception of the
proper name, the words bear no more than their
literal meaning. But the name does not simply denote the shepherd Menalcas, but is a pseudonym for
Virgil himself. Oratory makes frequent use of such
allegory, but generally with this modification, that
there is an admixture of plain speaking. We get
allegory pure and unadulterated in the following
passage of Cicero The following is an example
of the commonest type, namely, the mixed allegory Had he not added
the words we should have had pure allegory
their addition, however, converted it into a mixed
allegory. In this type of allegory the ornamental
element is provided by the metaphorical words and
the meaning is indicated by those which are used
literally. But far the most ornamental effect is produced by the artistic admixture of simile, metaphor
and allegory, as in the following example For it is all-important to follow
the principle illustrated by this passage and never to mix your metaphors. But there are many who, after
beginning with a tempest, will end with a fire or a
falling house, with the result that they produce a
hideously incongruous effect. For the rest, allegory
is often used by men of little ability and in the
conversation of everyday life. For those hackneyed
phrases of forensic pleading, or are all of
them allegorical, although they do not strike the
attention for it is novelty and change that please
in oratory, and what is unexpected always gives special
delight. Consequently we have thrown all restraint
to the wind in such matters, and have destroyed the
charm of language by the extravagant efforts which
we have made to attain it. Illustrative examples also
involve allegory if not preceded by an explanation;
for there are numbers of sayings available for use like
the which is such a
favourite with the Greeks. When, however, an allegory
is too obscure, we call it a riddle such riddles are,
in my opinion, to be regarded as blemishes, in view of
the fact that lucidity is a virtue; nevertheless they
are used by poets, as, for example, by Virgil in the
following lines Even orators sometimes use them, as when Caelius
speaks of the For although we
know the answers, and although they were better
known at the time when the words were uttered, they are riddles for all that; and other riddles are,
after all, intelligible if you can get someone to explain
them. On the other hand, that class of allegory in which
the meaning is contrary to that suggested by the
words, involve an element of irony, or, as our
rhetoricians call it, illusio. This is made evident to
the understanding either by the delivery, the character of the speaker or the nature of the subject.
For if any one of these three is out of keeping with
the words, it at once becomes clear that the intention of the speaker is other than what he actually
says In the majority of tropes it is, however,
important to bear in mind not merely what is said,
but about whom it is said, since what is said may
in another context be literally true. It is permissible to censure with counterfeited praise and
praise under a pretence of blame. The following will
serve as an example of the first. As an example of the reverse process we may take
the following Sometimes, again,
we may speak in mockery when we say the opposite
of what we desire to be understood, as in Cicero's
denunciation of Clodius Further, we may employ allegory, and
disguise bitter taunts in gentle words I y way of wit,
or we may indicate our meaning by saying exactly
the contrary or. . . If the Greek names for these methods are unfamiliar to any of my readers, I would
remind him that they are and sarcasm, urbane wit, contradiction and proverbs. There are, however, some
writers who deny that these are species of allegory,
and assert that they are actually tropes in themselves
for they argue shrewdly that allegory involves an
element of obscurity, whereas in all these cases our
meaning is perfectly obvious. To this may be added
the fact that when a genus is divided into species, it
ceases to have any peculiar properties of its own for
example, we may divide tree into its species, pine,
olive, cypress, etc., leaving it no properties of its own,
whereas allegory always has some property peculiar
to itself. The only explanation of this fact is that
it is itself a species. But this, of course, is a matter
of indifference to those that use it. To these the
Greeks add or mockery under the
thinnest of disguises. When we use a number of words to describe something for which one, or at any rate only a few words
of description would suffice, it is called periphrasis,
that is, a circuitous mode of speech. It is sometimes
necessary, being of special service when it conceals
something which would be indecent, if expressed in
so many words compare the phrase from Sallust. But at times it
is employed solely for decorative effect, a practice
most frequent among the poets Still it is far from uncommon even in oratory, though in such cases it is always used with greater restraint.
For whatever might have been expressed with greater
brevity, but is expanded for purposes of ornament, is
a periphrasis, to which we give the name circumlocution,
though it is a term scarcely suitable to describe one
of the virtues of oratory. But it is only called periphrasis so long as it produces a decorative effect
when it passes into excess, it is known as perissology
for whatever is not a help, is a positive hindrance. Again, hyperbaton, that is, the transposition of a
word, is often demanded by the structure of the
sentence and the claims of elegance, and is consequently counted among the ornaments of style.
For our language would often be harsh, rough, limp
or disjointed, if the words were always arranged in
their natural order and attached each to each just
as they occur, despite the fact that there is no real
bond of union. Consequently some words require
to be postponed, others to be anticipated, each
being set in its appropriate place. For we are like
those who build a wall of unhewn stone we cannot
hew or polish our words in order to make them fit
more compactly, and so we must take them as they
are and choose suitable positions for them. Further,
it is impossible to make our prose rhythmical except
by artistic alterations in the order of words, and
the reason why those four words in which Plato
in the noblest of his works states that he had gone
down to the Piraeus were found written in a number
of different orders upon his wax tablets, was simply
that he desired to make the rhythm as perfect as
possible. When, however, the transposition is confined to two words only, it is called anastrophe, that
is, a reversal of order. This occurs in everyday speech in mecum and secure, while in orators and
historians we meet with it in the phrase quibus de
rebus. It is the transposition of a word to some
distance from its original place, in order to secure
an ornamental effect, that is strictly called hyperbaton the following passage will provide an example
animadverti, indices, omnem accusatoris orationenm in duas
divisam esse partes. 
In this case the strictly correct order would be in duas
partes divisam esse, but this would have been harsh
and ugly. The poets even go so far as to secure
this effect by the division of words, as in the line a licence wholly inadmissible in oratory. Still there
is good reason for calling such a transposition a trope,
since the meaning is not complete until the two words
have been put together. On the other hand, when
the transposition makes no alteration in the sense, and
merely produces a variation in the structure, it is rather
to be called a verbal figure, as indeed many authorities
have held. Of the faults resulting from long or confused hyperbata have spoken in the appropriate place. I have kept hyperbole to the last, on the ground of
its boldness. It means an elegant straining of the
truth, and may be employed indifferently for exaggeration or attenuation. It can be used in various
ways. We may say more than the actual facts, as
when Cicero says, He vomited and filled his lap
and the whole tribunal with fragments of food, or
when Virgil speaks of Again, we may exalt our theme by the use of simile,
as in the phrase Or we may produce the same result by introducing
a comparison, as in the phrase or by the use of indications, as in the lines Or we may employ a metaphor, as the verb to fly is
employed in the passage just quoted. Sometimes,
again, one hyperbole may be heightened by the
addition of another, as when Cicero in denouncing
Antony says I think, too, that I am right in saying that
I noted a brilliant example of the same kind in the
Hymns of Pindar, the prince of lyric poets. For
when he describes the onslaught made by Hercules
upon the Meropes, the legendary inhabitants of the
island of Cos, he speaks of the hero as like not to
fire, winds or sea, but to the thunderbolt, making
the latter the only true equivalent of his speed and
power, the former being treated as quite inadequate.
Cicero has imitated his method in the following passage from the Verrines The methods
of hyperbole by attenuation are the same in number.
Compare the Virgilian or the lines from a humorous work of Cicero's, But even here a certain proportion must be observed.
For although every hyperbole involves the incredible,
it must not go too far in this direction, which
provides the easiest road to extravagant affectation.
I shrink from recording the faults to which the lack
of this sense of proportion has given rise, more
especially as they are so well known and obvious.
It is enough to say that hyperbole lies, though
without any intention to deceive. We must therefore be all the more careful to consider how far we
may go in exaggerating facts which our audience
may refuse to believe. Again, hyperbole will often
cause a laugh. If that was what the orator desired, we may give him credit for wit; otherwise we can
only call him a fool. Hyperbole is employed even
by peasants and uneducated persons, for the good
reason that everybody has an innate passion for
exaggeration or attenuation of actual facts, and no
one is ever contented with the simple truth. But
such disregard of truth is pardonable, for it does not
involve the definite assertion of the thing that is not.
Hyperbole is, moreover, a virtue, when the subject
on which we have to speak is abnormal. For we are
allowed to amplify, when the magnitude of the facts
passes all words, and in such circumstances our
language will be more effective if it goes beyond
the truth than if it falls short of it. However, I
have said enough on this topic, since I have already
dealt with it in my work on the causes of the decline
of oratory. div1