Since then the orator is a good man, and such
goodness cannot be conceived as existing apart from virtue, virtue, despite the fact that it is in part
derived from certain natural impulses, will require to
be perfected by instruction. The orator must above
all things devote his attention to the formation of
moral character and must acquire a complete knowledge of all that is just and honourable. For without
this knowledge no one can be either a good man or
skilled in speaking, unless indeed we agree with
those who regard morality as intuitive and as owing
nothing to instruction indeed they go so far as to
acknowledge that handicrafts, not excluding even
those which are most despised among them, can
only be acquired by the result of teaching, whereas
virtue, which of all gifts to man is that which makes
him most near akin to the immortal gods, comes to
him without search or effort, as a natural concomitant
of birth. But can the man who does not know what
abstinence is, claim to be truly abstinent or brave, if
he has never purged his soul of the fears of pain, death
and superstition or just, it he has never, in language
approaching that of philosophy, discussed the nature
of virtue and justice, or of the laws that have been
given to mankind by nature or established among
individual peoples and nations What a contempt
it argues for such themes to regard them as being
so easy of comprehension However, I pass this by;
for I am sure that no one with the least smattering
of literary culture will have the slightest hesitation
in agreeing with me. I will proceed to my next
point, that no one will achieve sufficient skill even in
speaking, unless he makes a thorough study of all
the workings of nature and forms his character on
the precepts of philosophy and the dictates of reason.
For it is with good cause that Lucius Crassus, in the third book of the de Oratore, affirms that all that is
said concerning equity, justice, truth and the good,
and their opposites, forms part of the studies of an
orator, and that the philosophers, when they exert
their powers of speaking to defend these virtues, are
using the weapons of rhetoric, not their own. But
he also confesses that the knowledge of these subjects must be sought from the philosophers for the
reason that, in his opinion, philosophy has more
effective possession of them. And it is for the same
reason that Cicero in several of his books and letters
proclaims that eloquence has its fountain-head in the
most secret springs of wisdom, and that consequently
for a considerable time the instructors of morals and
of eloquence were identical. Accordingly this exhortation of mine must not be taken to mean that I
wish the orator to be a philosopher, since there is no
other way of life that is further removed from the
duties of a statesman and the tasks of an orator.
For what philosopher has ever been a frequent
speaker in the courts or won renown in public
assemblies Nay, what philosopher has ever taken a
prominent part in the government of the state, which
forms the most frequent theme of their instructions
None the less I desire that he, whose character I am
seeking to mould, should be a in the
Roman sense, that is, one who reveals himself as a true
statesman, not in the discussions of the study, but
in the actual practice and experience of life. But
inasmuch as the study of philosophy has been
deserted by those who have turned to the pursuit of
eloquence, and since philosophy no longer moves in
its true sphere of action and in the broad daylight of
the forum, but has retired first to porches and gymnasia and finally to the gatherings of the schools, all
that is essential for an orator, and yet is not taught
by the professors of eloquence, must undoubtedly be
sought from those persons in whose possession it
has remained. The authors who have discoursed on
the nature of virtue must be read through and
through, that the life of the orator may be wedded
to the knowledge of things human and divine. But
how much greater and fairer would such subjects
appear if those who taught them were also those
who could give them most eloquent expression O
that the day may dawn when the perfect orator of
our heart's desire shall claim for his own possession
that science that has lost the affection of mankind
through the arrogance of its claims and the vices of
some that have brought disgrace upon its virtues,
and shall restore it to its place in the domain of
eloquence, as though he had been victorious in a
trial for the restoration of stolen goods And since
philosophy falls into three divisions, physics, ethics
and dialectic, which, I ask you, of these departments is not closely connected with the task of the
orator Let us reverse the order just given and deal first
with the third department which is entirely concerned with words. If it be true that to know the
properties of each word, to clear away ambiguities,
to unravel perplexities, to distinguish between truth
and falsehood, to prove or to refute as may be
desired, all form part of the functions of an orator,
who is there that can doubt the truth of my contention I grant that we shall not have to employ
dialectic with such minute attention to detail when
we are pleading in the courts as when we are engaged in philosophical debate, since the orator's
duty is not merely to instruct, but also to move and
delight his audience; and to succeed in doing this
he needs a strength, impetuosity and grace as well.
For oratory is like a river the current is stronger
when it flows within deep banks and with a mighty
flood, than when the waters are shallow and broken
by the pebbles that bar their way. And just as
the trainers of the wrestling school do not impart
the various throws to their pupils that those who
have learnt them may make use of all of them in
actual wrestling matches for weight and strength
and wind count for more than these, but that they
may have a store from which to draw one or two
of such tricks, as occasion may offer; even so the
science of dialectic, or if you prefer it of disputation, while it is often useful in definition, inference,
differentiation, resolution of ambiguity, distinction
and classification, as also in luring on or entangling
our opponents, yet if it claim to assume the entire
direction of the struggles of the forum, will merely
stand in the way of arts superior to itself and by its
very subtlety will exhaust the strength that has
been pared down to suit its limitations. As a
result you will find that certain persons who show
astonishing skill in philosophical debate, as soon as
they quit the sphere of their quibbles, are as helpless in any case that demands more serious pleading
as those small animals which, though nimble enough
in a confined space, are easily captured in an open
field. Proceeding to moral philosophy or ethics, we may
note that it at any rate is entirely suited to the
orator. For vast as is the variety of cases since in them, as I have pointed out in previous books, we seek
to discover certain points by conjecture, reach our
conclusions in others by means of definition, dispose
of others on legal grounds' or by raising the question of competence, while other points are established by syllogism and others involve contradictions or are diversely interpreted owing to some
ambiguity of language, there is scarcely a single
one which does not at some point or another involve
the discussion of equity and virtue, while there are
also, as everyone knows, not a few which turn
entirely on questions of quality. Again in deliberative assemblies how can we advise a policy without
raising the question of what is honourable Nay,
even the third department of oratory, which is
concerned with the tasks of praise and denunciation,
must without a doubt deal with questions of right
and wrong. For the orator will assuredly have
much to say on such topics as justice, fortitude,
abstinence, self-control and piety. But the good
man, who has come to the knowledge of these things
not by mere hearsay, as though they were just words
and names for his tongue to employ, but has grasped
the meaning of virtue and acquired a true feeling for
it, will never be perplexed when he has to think out
a problem, but will speak out truly what he
knows. Since, however, general questions are always
more important than special for the particular is
contained in the universal, while the universal is
never to be regarded as something superimposed on
the particular, everyone will readily admit that the
studies of which we are speaking are pre-eminently
concerned with general questions. Further, since
there are numerous points which require to be determined by appropriate and concise definitions
hence the definitive basis of cases, it is surely
desirable that the orator should be instructed in
such things by those who have devoted special
attention to the subject. Again, does not every
question of law turn either on the precise meaning
of words, the discussion of equity, or conjecture as
to the intentionsubjects which in part encroach on
the domain of dialectic and in part on that of ethics
Consequently all oratory involves a natural admixture
of all these philosophic elementsat least, that is to
say, all oratory that is worthy of the name. For
mere garrulity that is ignorant of all such learning
must needs go astray, since its guides are either
non-existent or false. Physics on the other hand is far richer than the
other branches of philosophy, if viewed from the
standpoint of providing exercise in speaking, in
proportion as a loftier inspiration is required to
speak of things divine than of things human; and
further it includes within its scope the whole of
ethics, which as we have shown are essential to the
very existence of oratory. For, if the world is
governed by providence, it will certainly be the
duty of all good men to bear their part in the
administration of the state. If the origin of our
souls be divine, we must win our way towards virtue
and abjure the service of the lusts of our earthly
body. Are not these themes which the orator will
frequently be called upon to handle Again there
are questions concerned with auguries and oracles
or any other religious topic all of them subjects
that have often given rise to the most important debates in the senate on which the orator will have to discourse, if he is also to be the statesman we
would have him be. And finally, how can we conceive of any real eloquence at all proceeding from
a man who is ignorant of all that is best in the
world If our reason did not make these facts
obvious, we should still be led by historical examples
to believe their truth. For Pericles, whose eloquence, despite the fact that it has left no visible
record for posterity, was none the less, if we may
believe the historians and that free-speaking tribe,
the old comic poets, endowed with almost incredible
force, is known to have been a pupil of the physicist
Anaxagoras, while Demosthenes, greatest of all the
orators of Greece, sat at the feet of Plato. As for
Cicero, he has often proclaimed the fact that he
owed less to the schools of rhetoric than to the
walks of Academe nor would he ever have developed
such amazing fertility of talent, had he bounded his
genius by the limits of the forum and not by the
frontiers of nature herself. But this leads me to another question as to which
school of philosophy is like to prove of most service
to oratory, although there are only a few that can be
said to contend for this honour. For in the first
place Epicurus banishes us from his presence without
more ado, since he bids all his followers to fly from
learning in the swiftest ship that they can find.
Nor would Aristippus, who regards the highest good
as consisting in physical pleasure, be likely to exhort
us to the toils entailed by our study. And what
part can Pyrrho have in the work that is before us
For he will have doubts as to whether there exist
judges to address, accused to defend, or a senate
where he can be called upon to speak his opinion. Some authorities hold that the Academy will be the
most useful school, on the ground that its habit of
disputing on both sides of a question approaches
most nearly to the actual practice of the courts.
And by way of proof they add the fact that this
school has produced speakers highly renowned for
their eloquence. The Peripatetics also make it their
boast that they have a form of study which is near
akin to oratory. For it was with them in the main
that originated the practice of declaiming on general
questions by way of exercise. The Stoics, though
driven to admit that, generally speaking, their teachers
have been deficient both in fullness and charm of
eloquence, still contend that no men can prove more
acutely or draw conclusions with greater subtlety
than themselves. But all these arguments take
place within their own circle, for, as though they
were tied by some solemn oath or held fast in the
bonds of some superstitious belief, they consider that
it is a crime to abandon a conviction once formed.
On the other hand, there is no need for an orator to
swear allegiance to any one philosophic code. For
lie has a greater and nobler aim, to which he directs
all his efforts with as much zeal as if he were a
candidate for office, since he is to be made perfect
not only in the glory of a virtuous life, but in that of
eloquence as well. He will consequently select as
his models of eloquence all the greatest masters of
oratory, and will choose the noblest precepts and
the most direct road to virtue as the means for
the formation of an upright character. He will
neglect no form of exercise, but will devote special
attention to those which are of the highest and
fairest nature. For what subject can be found more fully adapted to a rich and weighty eloquence than
the topics of virtue, politics, providence, the origin
of the soul and friendship The themes which tend
to elevate mind and language alike are questions
such as what things are truly good, what means there
are of assuaging fear, restraining the passions and
lifting us and the soul that came from heaven clear
of the delusions of the common herd. But it is desirable that we should not restrict our
study to the precepts of philosophy alone. It is still
more important that we should know and ponder
continually all the noblest sayings and deeds that have
been handed down to us from ancient times. And
assuredly we shall nowhere find a larger or more
remarkable store of these than in the records of our
own country. Who will teach courage, justice,
loyalty, self-control, simplicity, and contempt of
grief and pain better than men like Fabricius, Curius,
Regulus, Decius, Mucius and countless others For
if the Greeks bear away the palm for moral precepts,
Rome can produce more striking examples of moral
performance, which is a far greater thing. But the
man who does not believe that it is enough to fix
his eyes merely on his own age and his own transitory
life, but regards the space allotted for an honourable
life and the course in which glory's race is run as
conditioned solely by the memory of posterity, will
not rest content with a mere knowledge of the
events of history. No, it is from the thought of
posterity that he must inspire his soul with justice
and derive that freedom of spirit which it is his duty
to display when he pleads in the courts or gives
counsel in the senate. No man will ever be the
consummate orator of whom we are in quest unless he has both the knowledge and the courage to speak
in accordance with the promptings of honour. III. Our orator will also require a knowledge of
civil law and of the custom and religion of the state
in whose life he is to bear his part. For how will he
be able to advise either in public or in private, if he
is ignorant of all the main elements that go to make
the state How can he truthfully call himself an
advocate if he has to go to others to acquire that
knowledge which is all-important in the courts
He will be little better than if he were a reciter of
the poets. For he will be a mere transmitter of the
instructions that others have given him, it will be on
the authority of others that he propounds what he
asks the judge to believe, and he whose duty it is to
succour the litigant will himself be in need of succour.
It is true that at times this may be effected with but
little inconvenience, if what he advances for the
edification of the judge has been taught him and
composed in the seclusion of his study and learnt by
heart there like other elements of the case. But
what will he do, when he is confronted by unexpected
problems such as frequently arise in the actual
course of pleading Will he not disgrace himself by looking round and asking the junior counsel
who sit on the benches behind him for advice Can
lie hope to get a thorough grasp of such information
at the very moment when he is required to produce
it in his speech Can he make his assertions with
confidence or speak with native simplicity as though
his arguments were his own Grant that he may do
so in his actual speech. But what will he do in a
debate, when he has continually to meet fresh points
raised by his opponent and is given no time to learn up his case What will do, if he has no legal
expert to advise him or if his prompter through
insufficient knowledge of the subject provides him
with information that is false It is the most serious
drawback of such ignorance, that he will always
believe that his adviser knows what he is talking
about. I am not ignorant of the generally prevailing custom, nor have I forgotten those who sit by
our store-chests and provide weapons for the pleader
I know too that the Greeks did likewise hence
the name of pragmaticus which was bestowed on
such persons. But I am speaking of an orator, who
owes it as a duty to his case to serve it not merely
by the loudness of his voice, but by all other means
that may be of assistance to it. Consequently I do
not wish my orator to be helpless, if it so chance
that he puts in an appearance for the preliminary
proceedings to which the hour before the commencement of the trial is allotted, or to be unskilful in
the preparation and production of evidence. For
who, sooner than himself, should prepare the points
which he wishes to be brought out when he is
pleading You might as well suppose that the
qualifications of a successful general consist merely
in courage and energy in the field of battle and skill
in meeting all the demands of actual conflict, while
suffering him to be ignorant of the methods of levying troops, mustering and equipping his forces,
arranging for supplies or selecting a suitable position
for his camp, despite the fact that preparation for
war is an essential preliminary for its successful
conduct. And yet such a general would bear a
very close resemblance to the advocate who leaves
much of the detail that is necessary for success to the care of others, more especially in view of the
fact that this, the most necessary element in the
management of a case, is not as difficult as it may
perhaps seem to outside observers. For every point
of law, which is certain, is based either on written
law or accepted custom if, on the other hand, the
point is doubtful, it must be examined in the light
of equity. Laws which are either written or founded
on accepted custom present no difficulty, since they
call merely for knowledge and make no demand on
the imagination. On the other hand, the points explained in the rulings of the legal experts turn either
on the interpretation of words or on the distinction
between right and wrong. To understand the meaning of each word is either common to all sensible
men or the special possession of the orator, while
the demands of equity are known to every good
man. Now I regard the orator above all as being
a man of virtue and good sense, who will not be
seriously troubled, after having devoted himself to
the study of that which is excellent by nature, if
some legal expert disagrees with him; for even they
are allowed to disagree among themselves. But if
he further wishes to know the views of everyone,
he will require to read, and reading is the least
laborious of' all the tasks that fall to the student's
lot. Moreover, if the class of legal experts is as a rule
drawn from those who, in despair of making successful pleaders, have taken refuge with the law,
how easy it must be for an orator to know what
those succeed in learning, who by their own confession are incapable of becoming orators But
Marcus Cato was at once a great orator and an
expert lawyer, while Scaevola and Servius Sulpicius were universally allowed to be eloquent as well.
And Cicero not merely possessed a sufficient supply of
legal knowledge to serve his needs when pleading,
but actually began to write on the subject, so that
it is clear that an orator has not merely time to
learn, but even to teach the law. Let no one, however, regard the advice I have
given as to the attention due to the development
of character and the study of the law as being
impugned by the fact that we are familiar with
many who, because they were weary of the toil
entailed on those who seek to scale the heights
of eloquence, have betaken themselves to the study
of law as a refuge for their indolence. Some of
these transfer their attention to the praetor's edicts
or the civil law, and have preferred to become
specialists in formulae, or legalists, as Cicero calls
them, on the pretext of choosing a more useful
branch of study, whereas their real motive was its
comparative easiness. Others are the victims of a
more arrogant form of sloth; they assume a stern
air and let their beards grow, and, as though despising the precepts of oratory, sit for a while in
the schools of the philosophers, that, by an assumption of a severe mien before the public gaze and by
an affected contempt of others they may assert their
moral superiority, while leading a life of debauchery
at home. For philosophy may be counterfeited, but
eloquence never. 