But these rules of style, while part of the
student's theoretical knowledge, are not in themselves sufficient to give him oratorical power. In
addition he will require that assured facility which
the Greeks call I know that many have raised
the question as to whether this is best acquired by
writing, reading or speaking, and it would indeed
be a question calling for serious consideration, if we
could rest content with any one of the three. But
they are so intimately and inseparably connected,
that if one of them be neglected, we shall but waste
the labour which we have devoted to the others.
For eloquence will never attain to its full development or robust health, unless it acquires strength
by frequent practice in writing, while such practice
without the models supplied by reading will be like
a ship drifting aimlessly without a steersman.
Again, he who knows what he ought to say and
how he should say it, will be like a miser brooding
over his hoarded treasure, unless he has the weapons
of his eloquence ready for battle and prepared to
deal with every emergency. But the degree in which a thing is essential does not necessarily make
it of immediate and supreme importance for the
formation of the ideal orator. For obviously the
power of speech is the first essential, since therein
lies the primary task of the orator, and it is obvious
that it was with this that the art of oratory began,
and that the power of imitation comes next, and
third and last diligent practice in writing. But as
perfection cannot be attained without starting at
the very beginning, the points which come first in
time will, as our training proceeds, become of quite
trivial importance. Now we have reached a stage in
our enquiry where we are no longer considering the
preliminary training of our orator; for I think the
instructions already given should suffice for that;
they are in any case as good as I could make them.
Our present task is to consider how our athlete who
has learnt all the technique of his art from his
trainer, is to be prepared by actual practice for the
contests in which he will have to engage. Consequently, we must assume that our student has
learned how to conceive and dispose his subject
matter and understands how to choose and arrange
his words, and must proceed to instruct him how to
make the best and readiest use of the knowledge
which he has acquired. There can then be no doubt that he must accumulate a certain store of resources, to be employed
whenever they may be required. The resources of
which I speak consist in a copious supply of words
and matter. But while the matter is necessarily
either peculiar to the individual case, or at best
common to only a few, words must be acquired to
suit all and every case. Now, if there were special words adapted to each individual thing, they would
require less care, since they would automatically be
suggested by the matter in hand. But since some
words are more literal, more ornate, more significant
or euphonious than others, our orator must not
merely be acquainted with all of them, but must
have them at his fingers' ends and before his very
eyes, so that when they present themselves for his
critical selection, he will find it easy to make the
appropriate choice. I know that some speakers
make a practice of learning lists of synonyms by
heart, in order that one word out of the several
available may at once present itself to them, and
that if, after using one word, they find that it is
wanted again after a brief interval, they may be
able to select another word with the same meaning
and so avoid the necessity of repetition. But this
practice is childish and involves thankless labour,
while it is really of very little use, as it merely
results in the assembly of a disorderly crowd of
words, for the speaker to snatch the first that comes
to hand. On the contrary, discrimination is necessary in
the acquisition of our stock of words; for we are
aiming at true oratory, not at the fluency of a
cheapjack. And we shall attain our aim by reading
and listening to the best writers and orators, since
we shall thus learn not merely the words by which
things are to be called, but when each particular
word is most appropriate. For there is a place in
oratory for almost every word, with the exception
only of a very few, which are not sufficiently seemly.
Such words are indeed often praised when they
occur in writers of iambics or of the old comedy, but we need do no more than consider our own
special task. All words, with these exceptions,
may be admirably employed in some place or
other. For sometimes we shall even require low
and common words, while those which would
seem coarse if introduced in the more elegant
portions of our speech may, under certain circumstances, be appropriate enough. Now to acquire a
knowledge of these words and to be acquainted not
merely with their meaning, but with their forms and
rhythmical values, so that they may seem appropriate
wherever employed, we shall need to read and listen
diligently, since all language is received first through
the ear. It was owing to this fact that the children
who, by order of a king, were brought up by a dumb
nurse in a desert place, although they are said to
have uttered certain words, lacked the power of
speech. There are, however, some words of such
a nature that they express the same sense by
different sounds, so that it makes no difference to
the meaning which we use, as, for instance, gladius
and ensis, which may be used indifferently when we
have to speak of a sword. Others, again, although
properly applied to specific objects, are used by
means of a trope to express the same sense, as, for
example, ferrum steel and muro point, which are
both used in the sense of sword. Thus, by the
figure known as abuse, we call all those who commit
a murder with any weapon whatsoever sicarii poniarders. In other cases we express our meaning
periphrastically, as, for instance, when Virgil
describes cheese as On the other hand, in a number of instances we
employ figures and substitute one expression for
another. Instead of we say or or or or But we may also
borrow from a word of cognate meaning. For or or are often
equivalent to Reading will provide us
with a rich store of expressions such as these,
and will enable us not merely to use them when
they occur to us, but also in the appropriate manner.
For they are not always interchangeable for
example, though I may be perfectly correct in
saying, for it does not
follow that I can say for and though mucro may be employed to
describe a sword, a sword does not necessarily mean
the same as mucro point. But, although a store
of words may be acquired by these means, we must
not read or listen to orators merely for the sake of
acquiring words. For in everything which we teach
examples are more effective even than the rules
which are taught in the schools, so long as the
student has reached a stage when he can appreciate
such examples without the assistance of a teacher,
and can rely on his own powers to imitate them.
And the reason is this, that the professor of rhetoric
lays down rules, while the orator gives a practical
demonstration. But the advantages conferred by reading and
listening are not identical. The speaker stimulates
us by the animation of his delivery, and kindles the
imagination, not by presenting us with an elaborate picture, but by bringing us into actual touch with
the things themselves. Then all is life and movement, and we receive the new-born offspring of his
imagination with enthusiastic approval. We are
moved not merely by the actual issue of the trial,
but by all that the orator himself has at stake. Moreover his voice, the grace of his gestures, the adaptation of his delivery which is of supreme importance
in oratory, and, in a word, all his excellences in
combination, have their educative effect. In reading,
on the other hand, the critical faculty is a surer
guide, inasmuch as the listener's judgment is often
swept away by his preference for a particular speaker,
or by the applause of an enthusiastic audience. For
we are ashamed to disagree with them, and an unconscious modesty prevents us from ranking our own
opinion above theirs, though all the time the taste
of the majority is vicious, and the claque may
praise even what does not really deserve approval.
On the other hand, it will sometimes also happen
that an audience whose taste is bad will fail to award
the praise which is due to the most admirable utterances. Reading, however, is free, and does not hurry
past us with the speed of oral delivery; we can reread a passage again and again if we are in doubt
about it or wish to fix it in the memory. We must
return to what we have read and reconsider it with
care, while, just as we do not swallow our food till
we have chewed it and reduced it almost to a state
of liquefaction to assist the process of digestion, so
what we read must not be committed to the memory
for subsequent imitation while it is still in a crude
state, but must be softened and, if I may use the
phrase, reduced to a pulp by frequent re-perusal. For a long time also we should read none save the
best authors and such as are least likely to betray our
trust in then, while our reading must be almost as
thorough as if we were actually transcribing what we
read. Nor must we study it merely in parts, but
must read through the whole work from cover to
cover and then read it afresh, a precept which applies
more especially to speeches, whose merits are often
deliberately disguised. For the orator frequently
prepares his audience for what is to come, dissembles
and sets a trap for them and makes remarks at the
opening of his speech which will not have their full
force till the conclusion. Consequently what he
says will often seem comparatively ineffective where
it actually occurs, since we do not realise his motive
and it will be necessary to re-read the speech after
we have acquainted ourselves with all that it contains. Above all, it is most desirable that we should
familiarise ourselves with the facts of the case with
which the speech deals, and it will be well also,
wherever possible, to read the speeches delivered on
both sides, such as those of Aeschines and Demosthenes in the case of Ctesiphon, of Servius Sulpicius
and Messala for and against Aufidia, of Pollio and
Cassius in the case of Asprenas, and many others.
And even if such speeches seem unequal in point of
merit, we shall still do well to study them carefully
with a view to understanding the problems raised by
the cases with which they deal for example, we
should compare the speeches delivered by Tubero
against Ligarius and by Hortensius in defence of
Verres with those of Cicero for the opposite side,
while it will also be useful to know how different
orators pleaded the same case. For example, Calidius spoke on the subject of Cicero's house,
Brutus wrote a declamation in defence of Milo, which
Cornelius Celsus wrongly believes to have been
actually delivered in court, and Pollio and Messalla
defended the same clients, while in my boyhood
remarkable speeches delivered by Domitius Afer,
Crispus Passienus and Decimis Laelius in defence of Volusenus were in circulation. The reader must not, however, jump to the conclusion that all that was uttered by the best authors is
necessarily perfect. At times they lapse and stagger
beneath the weight of their task, indulge their bent
or relax their efforts. Sometimes, again, they give
the impression of weariness for example, Cicero
thinks that Demosthenes sometimes nods, and Horace
says the same of Homer himself. For despite their
greatness they are still but mortal men, and it will
sometimes happen that their reader assumes that
anything which he finds in them may be taken as a
canon of style, with the result that he imitates their
defects and it is always easier to do this than to
imitate their excellences and thinks himself a
perfect replica if he succeeds in copying the
blemishes of great men. But modesty and circumspection are required in pronouncing judgment on
such great men, since there is always the risk of
falling into the common fault of condemning what
one does not understand. And, if it is necessary to
err on one side or the other, I should prefer that
the reader should approve of everything than that
he should disapprove of much. Theophrastus says that the reading of poets is
of great service to the orator, and has rightly been
followed in this view by many. For the poets will give us inspiration as regards the matter, sublimity
of language, the power to excite every kind of
emotion, and the appropriate treatment of character,
while minds that have become jaded owing to the
daily wear and tear of the courts will find refreshment in such agreeable study. Consequently Cicero
recommends the relaxation provided by the reading
of poetry. We should, however, remember that the
orator must not follow the poets in everything, more
especially in their freedom of language and their
license in the use of figures. Poetry has been compared to the oratory of display, and further aims
solely at giving pleasure, which it seeks to secure by
inventing what is not merely untrue, but sometimes
even incredible. Further, we must bear in mind
that it can be defended on the ground that it is tied
by certain metrical necessities and consequently cannot always use straightforward and literal language,
but is driven from the direct road to take refuge in
certain by-ways of expression; and compelled not
merely to change certain words, but to lengthen,
contract, transpose or divide them, whereas the
orator stands armed in the forefront of the battle,
fights for a high stake and devotes all his effort to
winning the victory. And yet I would not have his
weapons defaced by mould and rust, but would have
them shine with a splendour that shall strike terror
to the heart of the foe, like the flashing steel that
dazzles heart and eye at once, not like the gleam of
gold or silver, which has no warlike efficacy and is
even a positive peril to its wearer. History, also, may provide the orator with a nutriment which we may compare to some rich and
pleasant juice. But when we read it, we must remember that many of the excellences of the historian
require to be shunned by the orator. For history
has a certain affinity to poetry and may be regarded
as a kind of prose poem, while it is written for the
purpose of narrative, not of proof, and designed from
beginning to end not for immediate effect or the
instant necessities of forensic strife, but to record
events for the benefit of posterity and to win glory
for its author. Consequently, to avoid monotony of
narrative, it employs unusual words and indulges in
a freer use of figures. Therefore, as I have already
said, the famous brevity of Sallust, than which
nothing can be more pleasing to the leisured ear of
the scholar, is a style to be avoided by the orator in
view of the fact that his words are addressed to a
judge who has his mind occupied by a number of
thoughts and is also frequently uneducated, while,
on the other hand, the milky fullness of Livy is
hardly of a kind to instruct a listener who looks not
for beauty of exposition, but for truth and credibility.
We must also remember that Cicero thinks that not
even 'Thucydidcs or Xenophon will be of much service to an orator, although he regards the style of
the former as a veritable call to arms and considers
that the latter was the mouthpiece of the Muses.
It is, however, occasionally permissible to borrow the
graces of history to embellish our digressions, provided always that we remember that in those portions
of our speech which deal with the actual question
at issue we require not the swelling thews of the
athlete, but the wiry sinews of the soldier, and that
the cloak of many colours which Demetrius of
Phalerum was said to wear is but little suited to
the dust and heat of the forum. There is, it is true, another advantage which we may derive from the
historians, which, however, despite its great importance, has no bearing on our present topic; I refer to
the advantage derived from the knowledge of historical facts and precedents, with which it is most desirable that our orator should be acquainted; for such
knowledge will save him from having to acquire all
his evidence from his client and will enable him to
draw much that is germane to his case from the
careful study of antiquity. And such arguments will
be all the more effective, since they alone will be
above suspicion of prejudice or partiality. The fact that there is so much for which we must
have recourse to the study of the philosophers is
the fault of orators who have abandoned to them
the fullest portion of their own task. The Stoics
more especially discourse and argue with great
keenness on what is just, honourable, expedient
and the reverse, as well as on the problems of
theology, while the Socratics give the future orator
a first-rate preparation for forensic debates and
the examination of witnesses. But we must use the
same critical caution in studying the philosophers
that we require in reading history or poetry; that
is to say, we must bear in mind that, even when we
are dealing with the same subjects, there is a wide
difference between forensic disputes and philosophical
discussions, between the law-courts and the lecture-room, between the precepts of theory and the perils
of the bar. Most of my readers will, I think, demand that,
since I attach so much importance to reading, I
should include in this work some instructions as to
what authors should be read and what their special excellences may be. To do this in detail would be
an endless task. Remember that Cicero in his
Brutus, after writing pages and pages on the subject
of Roman orators alone, says nothing of his own contemporaries with the exception of Caesar and Marcellus. What limit, then, would there be to my
labours if I were to attempt to deal with them and
with their successors and all the orators of Greece as
well No, it was a safer course that Livy adopted
in his letter to his son, where he writes that he should
read Cicero and Demosthenes and then such orators
as most resembled them. Still, I must not conceal
my own personal convictions on this subject. I believe
that there are few, indeed scarcely a single one of
those authors who have stood the test of time who will
not be of some use or other to judicious students, since
even Cicero himself admits that he owes a great debt
even to the earliest writers, who for all their talent
were totally devoid of art. And my opinion about
the moderns is much the same. For how few of them
are so utterly crazy as not to have the least shadow
of hope that some portion or other of their work may
have claims upon the memory of posterity If there
is such an one, he will be detected before we have
perused many lines of his writings, and we shall
escape from him before the experiment of reading
him has cost us any serious loss of time. On the
other hand, not everything that has some bearing on
some department of knowledge will necessarily be of
service for the formation of style, with which we are
for the moment concerned. Before, however, I begin to speak of individual
authors, I must make a few general remarks about
the variety of judgments which have been passed upon them. For there are some who think that only
the ancients should be read and hold that they are
the sole possessors of natural eloquence and manly
vigour; while others revel in the voluptuous and
affected style of to-day, in which everything is designed to charm the ears of the uneducated majority.
And even if we turn to those who desire to follow
the correct methods of style, we shall find that some
think that the only healthy and genuinely Attic style
is to be found in language which is restrained and
simple and as little removed as possible from the
speech of every day, while others are attracted by a
style which is more elevated and full of energy and
animation. There are, too, not a few who are devoted to a gentle, elegant and harmonious style. Of
these different ideals I shall speak in greater detail,
when I come to discuss the question of the particular
styles best suited to oratory. For the moment I
shall restrict myself to touching briefly on what the
student who desires to consolidate his powers of
speaking should seek in his reading and to what kind
of reading he should devote his attention. My design is merely to select a few of the most eminent
authors for consideration. It will be easy for the
student to decide for himself what authors most
nearly resemble these consequently, no one will
have any right to complain if I pass over some of his
favourites. For I will readily admit that there are
more authors worth reading than those whom I propose to mention. But I will now proceed to deal
with the various classes of reading which I consider
most suitable for those who are ambitious of becoming
orators. I shall, I think, be right in following the principle laid down by Aratus in the line, and in beginning with Homer. He is like
his own conception of Ocean, which he describes as
the source of every stream and river; for he has
given us a model and an inspiration for every
department of eloquence. It will be generally admitted that no one has ever surpassed him in the
sublimity with which he invests great themes or the
propriety with which he handles small. He is at
once luxuriant and concise, sprightly and serious,
remarkable at once for his fullness and his brevity,
and supreme not merely for poetic, but for oratorical
power as well. For, to say nothing of his eloquence,
which he shows in praise, exhortation and consolation, do not the ninth book containing the embassy
to Achilles, the first describing the quarrel between
the chiefs, or the speeches delivered by the counsellors in the second, display all the rules of art
to be followed in forensic or deliberative oratory
As regards the emotions, there can be no one so illeducated as to deny that the poet was the master of all,
tender and vehement alike. Again, in the few lines
with which he introduces both of his epics, has he
not, I will not say observed, but actually established
the law which should govern the composition of the
exordium For, by his invocation of the goddesses
believed to preside over poetry he wins the goodwill
of his audience, by his statement of the greatness
of his themes he excites their attention and renders
them receptive by the briefness of his summary.
Who can narrate more briefly than the hero who
brings the news of Patroclus' death, or more vividly
than he who describes the battle between the
Curetes and the Aetolians Then consider his similes, his amplifications, his illustrations, digressions, indications of fact, inferences, and all the
other methods of proof and refutation which he
employs. They are so numerous that the majority
of writers on the principles of rhetoric have gone to
his works for examples of all these things. And as
for perorations, what can ever be equal to the prayers
which Priam addresses to Achilles when he comes
to beg for the body of his son Again, does he not
transcend the limits of human genius in his choice
of words, his reflexions, figures, and the arrangement
of his whole work, with the result that it requires a
powerful mind, I will not say to imitate, for that is
impossible, but even to appreciate his excellences
But he has in truth outdistanced all that have come
after him in every department of eloquence, above
all, he has outstripped all other writers of epic, the
contrast in their case being especially striking owing
to the similarity of the material with which they
deal. Hesiod rarely rises to any height, while a
great part of his works is filled almost entirely with
names none the less, his maxims of moral wisdom
provide a useful model, the smooth flow of his
words and structure merit our approval, and he
is assigned the first place among writers of the
intermediate style. On the other hand, Antimachus
deserves praise for the vigour, dignity and elevation of his language. But although practically all
teachers of literature rank him second among epic
poets, he is deficient in emotional power, charm, and
arrangement of matter, and totally devoid of real
art. No better example can be found to show what
a vast difference there is to being near another
writer and being second to him. Panyasis is regarded as combining the qualities of the last two
poets, being their inferior in point of style, but
surpassing Hesiod in the choice of his subject and
Antimachus in its arrangement. Apollonius is not
admitted to the lists drawn up by the professors
of literature, because the critics, Aristarchus and
Aristophanes, included no contemporary poets.
None the less, his work is by no means to be
despised, being distinguished by the consistency
with which he maintains his level as a representative of the intermediate type. The subject
chosen by Aratus is lifeless and monotonous, affording no scope for pathos, description of character,
or eloquent speeches. However, he is adequate for
the task to which he felt himself equal. Theocritus
is admirable in his own way, but the rustic and
pastoral muse shrinks not merely from the forum,
but from town-life of every kind. I think I hear
my readers on all sides suggesting the names of
hosts of other poets. What Did not Pisandros
tell the story of Hercules in admirable style
Were there not good reasons for Virgil and Macer
taking Nicander as a model Are we to ignore
Euphorion Unless Virgil had admired him, he
would never have mentioned in the Eclogues. Again, had Horace no justification
for coupling the name of Tyrtacus with that of
Homer To which I reply, that there is no one so
ignorant of poetic literature that he could not, if he
chose, copy a catalogue of such poets from some library for insertion in his own treatises. I can
therefore assure my readers that I am well aware
of the existence of the poets whom I pass over in
silence, and am far from condemning them, since I
have already said that some profit may be derived
from every author. But we must wait till our
powers have been developed and established to the
full before we turn to these poets, just as at banquets
we take our fill of the best fare and then turn
to other food which, in spite of its comparative
inferiority, is still attractive owing to its variety.
Not until our taste is formed shall we have leisure
to study the elegiac poets as well. Of these, Callimachus is regarded as the best, the second place
being, according to the verdict of most critics,
occupied by Philetas. But until we have acquired
that assured facility of which I spoke, we must
familiarise ourselves with the best writers only and
must form our minds and develop an appropriate tone
by reading that is deep rather than wide. Consequently, of the three writers of iambics approved by
the judgment of Aristarchus, Archilochus will be far
the most useful for the formation of the facility in
question. For he has a most forcible style, is full of
vigorous, terse and pungent reflexions, and overflowing with life and energy indeed, some critics
think that it is due solely to the nature of his
subjects, and not to his genius, that any poets are to
be ranked above him. Of the nine lyric poets
Pindar is by far the greatest, in virtue of his inspired
magnificence, the beauty of his thoughts and figures,
the rich exuberance of his language and matter,
and his rolling flood of eloquence, characteristics
which, as Horace rightly held, make him inimitable. The greatness of the genius of Stesichorus
is shown by his choice of subject for he sings of the
greatest wars and the most glorious of chieftains,
and the music of his lyre is equal to the weighty
themes of epic poetry. For both in speech and
action he invests his characters with the dignity
which is their due, and if he had only been capable
of exercising a little more restraint, he might,
perhaps, have proved a serious rival to Homer.
But he is redundant and diffuse, a fault which,
while deserving of censure, is nevertheless a defect
springing from the very fullness of his genius.
Alcaeus has deserved the compliment of being said
to make music with quill of gold in that portion
of his works in which he attacks the tyrants of his
day and shows himself a real moral force. He is,
moreover, terse and magnificent in style, while the
vigour of his diction resembles that of oratory. But
he also wrote poetry of a more sportive nature and
stooped to erotic poetry, despite his aptitude for
loftier themes. Simonides wrote in a simple style,
but may be recommended for the propriety and
charm of his language. His chief merit, however,
lies in his power to excite pity, so much so, in fact,
that some rank him in this respect above all writers
of this class of poetry. The old comedy is almost the only form of poetry
which preserves intact the true grace of Attic
diction, while it is characterized by the most eloquent freedom of speech, and shows especial power
in the denunciation of vice; but it reveals great
force in other departments as well. For its style
is at once lofty, elegant and graceful, and if we
except Homer, who, like Achilles among warriors, is beyond all comparison, I am not sure that there
is any style which bears a closer resemblance to
oratory or is better adapted for forming the orator.
There are a number of writers of the old comedy,
but the best are Aristophanes, Eupolis and Cratinus. Aeschylus was the first to bring tragedy into
prominence he is lofty, dignified, grandiloquent
often to a fault, but frequently uncouth and inharmonious. Consequently, the Athenians allowed
later poets to revise his tragedies and to produce
them in the dramatic contests, and many succeeded
in winning the prize by such means. Sophocles
and Euripides, however, brought tragedy to far
greater perfection they differ in style, but it is
much disputed as to which should be awarded the
supremacy, a question which, as it has no bearing
on my present theme, I shall make no attempt to
decide. But this much is certain and incontrovertible, that Euripides will be found of far greater service
to those who are training themselves for pleading in
court. For his language, although actually censured
by those who regard the dignity, the stately
stride and sonorous utterance of Sophocles as being
more sublime, has a closer affinity to that of oratory,
while he is full of striking reflexions, in which,
indeed, in their special sphere, he rivals the
philosophers themselves, and for defence and attack may be compared with any orator that has
won renown in the courts. Finally, although admirable in every kind of emotional appeal, he is
easily supreme in the power to excite pity.
Menander, as he often testifies in his works, had
a profound admiration for Euripides, and imitated
him, although in a different type of work. Now, the careful study of Menander alone would, in my
opinion, be sufficient to develop all those qualities
with the production of which my present work
is concerned; so perfect is his representation of
actual life, so rich is his power of invention and
his gift of style, so perfectly does he adapt himself
to every kind of circumstance, character and emotion. Indeed, those critics are no fools who think
the speeches attributed to Charisius were in reality
written by Menander. But I consider that he shows
his power as an orator far more clearly in his
comedies; since assuredly we can find no more
perfect models of every oratorical quality than the
judicial pleadings of his Epitrepontes, Epicleros
and Locri, or the declamatory speeches in the Psophodes, Nomothetes. and Hypobolimaeus. Still, for
my own part, I think that he will be found even more
useful by declaimers, in view of the fact that they
have, according to the nature of the various controversial themes, to undertake a number of different
roles and to impersonate fathers, sons, soldiers,
peasants, rich men and poor, the angry man and
the suppliant, the gentle and the harsh. And all
these characters are treated by this poet with
consummate appropriateness. Indeed, such is his
supremacy that he has scarce left a name to other
writers of the new comedy, and has cast them into
darkness by the splendour of his own renown.
Still, you will find something of value in the other
comic poets as well, if you read them in not too
critical a spirit; above all, profit may be derived
from the study of Philemon, who, although it was a depraved taste which caused his contemporaries
often to prefer him to Menander, has none the
less deserved the second place which posterity has
been unanimous in awarding him. If we turn to history, we shall find a number of
distinguished writers; but there are two who must
undoubtedly be set far above all their rivals their
excellences are different in kind, but have won
almost equal praise. Thucydides is compact in
texture, terse and ever eager to press forward Herodotus is pleasant, lucid and diffuse the former
excels in vigour, speeches and the expression of the
stronger passions; the latter in charm, conversations
and the delineation of the gentler emotions. Theopompus comes next, and though as a historian he
is inferior to the authors just mentioned, his style
has a greater resemblance to oratory, which is not
surprising, as he was an orator before he was urged
to turn to history. Philistus also deserves special
distinction among the crowd of later historians, good
though they may have been he was an imitator of
Thucydides, and though far his inferior, was somewhat more lucid. Ephorus, according to Isocrates,
needed the spur. Clitarchus has won approval by
his talent, but his accuracy has been impugned.
Timagenes was born long after these authors, but
deserves our praise for the very fact that he revived
the credit of history, the writing of which had fallen
into neglect. I have not forgotten Xenophon, but
he will find his place among the philosophers. There follows a vast army of orators, Athens alone
having produced ten remarkable orators in the
same generation. Of these Dermosthenes is far the
greatest indeed he came to be regarded almost as
the sole pattern of oratory. Such is the force and
compactness of his language, so muscular his style,
so free from tameness and so self-controlled, that
you will find nothing in him that is either too much
or too little. The style of Aesehines is fuller and
more diffuse, while his lack of restraint gives an
appearance of grandeur. But he has more flesh and
less muscle. Hyperides has extraordinary charm and
point, but is better qualified, not to say more useful,
for cases of minor importance. Lysias belongs to an
earlier generation than those whom I have just
mentioned. He has subtlety and elegance and, if
the orator's sole duty were merely to instruct, it
would be impossible to conceive greater perfection.
For there is nothing irrelevant or far-fetched in his
speeches. None the less I would compare him to a
clear spring rather than to a mighty river. Isocrates
was an exponent of a different style of oratory he is
neat and polished and better suited to the fencingschool than to the battlefield. He elaborated all the
graces of style, nor was he without justification. For
lie had trained himself for the lecture-room and not
the law-courts. He is ready in invention, his moral
ideals are high and the care which he bestows upon
his rhythm is such as to be a positive fault. I do
not regard these as the sole merits of the orators of
whom I have spoken, but have selected what seemed
to me their chief excellences, while those whom I
have passed over in silence were far from being
indifferent. In fact, I will readily admit that the famous Demetrius of Phalerum, who is said to
have been the first to set oratory on the downward path, was a man of great talent and eloquence
and deserves to be remembered, if only for the
fact that he is almost the last of the Attic
school who can be called an orator indeed Cicero
prefers him to all other orators of the intermediate
school. Proceeding to the philosophers, from whom Cicero
acknowledges that he derived such a large portion
of his eloquence, we shall all admit that Plato is
supreme whether in acuteness or perception or in
virtue of his divine gift of style, which is worthy of
Homer. For he soars high above the levels of
ordinary prose or, as the Greeks call it, pedestrian
language, and seems to me to be inspired not by
mere human genius, but, as it were, by the oracles
of the god of Delphi. Why should I speak of the
unaffected charm of Xenophon, so far beyond the
power of affectation to attain The Graces themselves seem to have moulded his style, and we may
with the utmost justice say of him, what the writer
of the old comedy said of Pericles, that the goddess
of persuasion sat enthroned upon his lips. Why
should I dwell on the elegance of the rest of the
Socratics or on Aristotle, with regard to whom I
hesitate whether to praise him more for his knowledge, for the multitude of his writings, the sweetness of his style, the penetration revealed by his
discoveries or the variety of the tasks which he essayed In Theophrastus we find such a superhuman brilliance of style that his name is said to be
derived therefrom. The ancient Stoics indulged
their eloquence comparatively little. Still, they
pleaded the cause of virtue, and the rules which
they laid down for argument and proof have been of
the utmost value. But they showed themselves
shrewd thinkers rather than striking orators, which
indeed they never aimed at being. I now come to Roman authors, and shall follow
the same order in dealing with them. As among
Greek authors Homer provided us with the most
auspicious opening, so will Virgil among our own.
For of all epic poets, Greek or Roman, he, without
doubt, most nearly approaches to Homer. I will
repeat the words which I heard Domitius Afer use
in my young days. I asked what poet in his opinion
came nearest to Homer, and he replied, And
in truth, although we must needs bow before the
immortal and superhuman genius of Homer, there
is greater diligence and exactness in the work
of Virgil just because his task was harder. And
perhaps the superior uniformity of the Roman's excellence balances Homer's pre-eminence in his outstanding passages. All our other poets follow a long
way in the rear. Macer and Lucretius are, it is true,
worth reading, but not for the purpose of forming
style, that is to say, the body of eloquence both
deal elegantly with their themes, but the former is
tame and the latter difficult. The poems by which
Varro of Atax gained his reputation were translations, but he is by no means to be despised, although
his diction is not sufficiently rich to be of much service in developing the resources of eloquence.
Ennius deserves our reverence, but only as those
groves whose age has made them sacred, but whose
huge and ancient trunks inspire us with religious
awe rather than with admiration for their beauty.
There are other poets who are nearer in point of
time and more useful for our present purpose. Ovid
has a lack of seriousness even when he writes epic
and is unduly enamoured of his own gifts, but
portions of his work merit our praise. On the other
hand, although Cornelius Severus is a better versifier
than poet, yet if, as has been said, he had written his
poem on the Sicilian war in the same style throughout
as his first book, he would have had a just claim to the
second place. A premature death prevented the
powers of Serranus from ripening to perfection, but
his youthful works reveal the highest talent and a
devotion to the true ideal of poetry, which is remarkable in one so young. We have suffered serious loss
in the recent death of Valerius Flaccus. Saleius
Bassus showed an ardent and genuinely poetic
genius, but, like that of Serranus, it was not
mellowed by years. Rabirius and Pedo deserve
to be studied by those who have the time. Lucan
is fiery and passionate and remarkable for the
grandeur of his general reflexions, but, to be frank,
I consider that he is more suitable for imitation by
the orator than by the poet. I have restricted my
list of poets to these names, because Germanicus Augustus has been distracted from the study of
poetry on which he had embarked by his care for
the governance of the world, and the gods have
thought it scarce worthy of his powers that he
should be the greatest of poets. But what can be
more sublime, more learned, more perfect in every
detail than those works to which he devoted himself
in the seclusion to which he retired after conferring
the supreme power upon his father and his brother
Who could sing of war better than he who wages it
with such skill To whom would the goddesses
that preside over literature sooner lend an ear To
whom would Minerva, his familiar deity, more
readily reveal her secrets Future ages shall tell of
these things more fully; to-day his glory as a poet
is dimmed by the splendour of his other virtues.
But you will forgive us, Caesar, who worship at the
shrine of literature, if we refuse to pass by your
achievements in silence and insist on testifying at
least that, as Virgil sings, We also challenge the supremacy of the Greeks in
elegy. Of our elegiac poets Tibullus seems to me
to be the most terse and elegant. There are, however, some who prefer Propertius. Ovid is more
sportive than either, while Gallus is more severe.
Satire, on the other hand, is all our own. The first
of our poets to win renown in this connexion was
Lucilius, some of whose devotees are so enthusiastic
that they do not hesitate to prefer him not merely
to all other satirists, but even to all other poets.
I disagree with them as much as I do with Horace,
who holds that Lucilius' verse has a For his learning is
as remarkable as his freedom of speech, and it is
this latter quality that gives so sharp an edge and
such abundance of wit to his satire. Horace is far
terser and purer in style, and must be awarded the
first place, unless my judgment is led astray by my
affection for his work. Persius also, although he
wrote but one book, has acquired a high and
well-deserved reputation, while there are other
distinguished satirists still living whose praises will
be sung by posterity. There is, however, another
and even older type of satire which derives its
variety not merely from verse, but from an admixture of prose as well. Such were the satires
composed by Terentius Varro, the most learned
of all Romans. He composed a vast number of
erudite works, and possessed an extraordinary knowledge of the Latin language, of all antiquity and
of the history of Greece and Rome. But he is
an author likely to contribute more to the knowledge of the student than to his eloquence. The
iambic has not been popular with Roman poets as a
separate form of composition, but is found mixed up
with other forms of verse. It may be found in all
its bitterness in Catullus, Bibaculus and Horace,
although in the last-named the iambic is interrupted
by the epode. Of our lyric writers Horace is almost
the sole poet worth reading for he rises at times to
a lofty grandeur and is full of sprightliness and
charm, while there is great variety in his figures, and
his boldness in the choice of words is only equalled
by his felicity. If any other lyric poet is to be
mentioned, it will be Caesius Bassus, who has but lately passed from us. But he is far surpassed in
talent by poets still living. Among writers of tragedy Accius and Pacuvius
are most remarkable for the force of their general
reflexions, the weight of their words and the dignity
of their characters. But they lack polish, and filed
to put the finishing touches on their works, although
the fault was perhaps rather that of the times in
which they lived than of themselves. Accius is
generally regarded as the most vigorous, while those
who lay claim to learning regard Pacuvius as the
more learned of the two. The Thyestes of Varius
is a match for any Greek tragedy, and the Medea
of Ovid shows, in my opinion, to what heights that
poet might have risen if he had been ready to curb
his talents instead of indulging them. Of the
tragic writers whom I myself have seen, Pomponius
Secundus is by far the best his older critics thought
him insufficiently tragic, but admitted his eminence as
far as learning and polish were concerned. Comedy
is our weakest point. Although Varro quotes Aelius
Stilo as saying that if the Muses wished to speak
Latin, they would use the language of Plautus,
although the ancients extol Caecilius, and although
Scipio Africanus is credited with the works of
Terence which are the most elegant of their kind,
and would be still more graceful if the poet had
confined himself to the iambic trimeter, we still
scarcely succeed in reproducing even a faint shadow
of the charm of Greek comedy. Indeed, it seems
to me as though the language of Rome were incapable of reproducing that graceful wit which was granted to Athens alone, and was beyond the reach
of other Greek dialects to achieve. Afranius excels
in the purely Roman comedy, but it is to be regretted
that he revealed his own character by defiling his
plots with the introduction of indecent paederastic
intrigues. In history, however, we hold our own with the
Greeks. I should not hesitate to match Saillst
against Thucydides, nor would Herodotus resent
Titus Livius being placed on the same level as himself. For the latter has a wonderful charm and
transparency in narrative, while his speeches are
eloquent beyond description; so admirably adapted
is all that is said both to the circumstances and the
speaker; and as regards the emotions, especially
the more pleasing of them, I may sum him up by
saying that no historian has ever depicted them to
greater perfection. Thus it is that, although by
different means, he has acquired no less fame than
has been awarded to the immortal rapidity of Sallust.
For I strongly approve of the saying of Servilius
Nonianus, that these historians were equal rather
than alike. Servilius, whom I myself have heard,
is himself remarkable for the force of his intellect,
and is full of general reflexions, but he is less restrained than the dignity of history demands. But
that dignity is admirably maintained, thanks to his
style, by Aufidius Bassus, a slightly earlier writer,
especially in his work on the German war he is
always praiseworthy, though at times he fails to do
his powers full justice. But there still survives to
add lustre to this glorious age a man worthy to be
remembered through all time he is appreciated today, but after generations shall declare his name aloud. The bold utterances of Crenutius also have
their admirers, and deserve their fame, though the
passages which brought him to his ruin have been
expurgated; still that which is left reveals a rich
store of lofty animation and fearless reflexions upon
life. There are other good writers as well, but I am
merely selecting from the different departments of
literature, not reviewing complete libraries. But it is our orators, above all, who enable us to
match our Roman eloquence against that of Greece.
For I would set Cicero against any one of their
orators without fear of refutation. I know well
enough what a storm I shall raise by this assertion,
more especially since I do not propose for the
moment to compare him with Demosthenes; for
there would be no point in such a comparison, as I
consider that Demosthenes should be the object of
special study, and not merely studied, but even committed to memory. I regard the excellences of these
two orators as being for the most part similar, that
is to say, their judgment, their gift of arrangement,
their methods of division, preparation and proof, as
well as everything concerned with invention. In
their actual style there is some difference. Demosthenes is more concentrated, Cicero more diffuse;
Demosthenes makes his periods shorter than Cicero,
and his weapon is the rapier, whereas Cicero's periods
are longer, and at times he employs the bludgeon as
well nothing can be taken from the former, nor
added to the latter; the Greek reveals a more
studied, the Roman a more natural art. As regards
wit and the power of exciting pity, the two most
powerful instruments where the feelings are concerned, we have the advantage. Again, it is possible that Demosthenes was deprived by national custom
of the opportunity of producing powerful perorations, but against this may be set the fact that the
different character of the Latin language debars us
from the attainment of those qualities which are
so much admired by the adherents of the Attic
school. As regards their letters, which have in
both cases survived, and dialogues, which Demosthenes never attempted, there can be no comparison
between the two. But, on the other hand, there is
one point in which the Greek has the undoubted
superiority he comes first in point of time, and it
was largely due to him that Cicero was able to attain
greatness. For it seems to me that Cicero, who
devoted himself heart and soul to the imitation of
the Greeks, succeeded in reproducing the force of
Demosthenes, the copious flow of Plato, and the
charm of Isocrates. But he did something more
than reproduce the best elements in each of these
authors by dint of careful study; it was to himself
that he owed most of, or rather all his excellences,
which spring from the extraordinary fertility of his
immortal genius. For he does not, as Pindar says, since Providence at his birth conferred
this special privilege upon him, that eloquence should
make trial of all her powers in him. For who can
instruct with greater thoroughness, or more deeply
stir the emotions Who has ever possessed such a
gift of charm He seems to obtain as a boon what
in reality he extorts by force, and when he wrests
the judge from the path of his own judgment, the
latter seems not to be swept away, but merely to
follow. Further, there is such weight in all that he says that his audience feel ashamed to disagree with
him, and the zeal of the advocate is so transfigured
that it has the effect of the sworn evidence of a
witness, or the verdict of a judge. And at the same
time all these excellences, of which scarce one could
be attained by the ordinary man even by the most
concentrated effort, flow from him with every appearance of spontaneity, and his style, although no fairer
has ever fallen on the ears of men, none the less
displays the utmost felicity and ease. It was not,
therefore, without good reason that his own contemporaries spoke of his at the bar, and
that for posterity the name of Cicero has come to be
regarded not as the name of a man, but as the name
of eloquence itself. Let us, therefore, fix our eyes on
him, take him as our pattern, and let the student realise
that he has made real progress if he is a passionate
admirer of Cicero. Asinius Pollio had great gifts of
invention and great precision of language indeed,
some think him too precise, while his judgment
and spirit were fully adequate. But he is so far from
equalling the polish and charm of Cicero that he
might have been born a generation before him.
Messala, on the other hand, is polished and transparent and displays his nobility in his utterance,
but he fails to do his powers full justice. As
for Gaius Caesar, if he had had leisure to devote
himself to the courts, he would have been the one
orator who could have been considered a serious rival
to Cicero. Such are his force, his penetration and
his energy that we realise that he was as vigorous in
speech as in his conduct of war. And yet all these
qualities are enhanced by a marvellous elegance of
language, of which he was an exceptionally zealous student. Caelius has much natural talent and much
wit, more especially when speaking for the prosecution, and deserved a wiser mind and a longer life.
I have come across some critics who preferred
Calvus to all other orators, and others again who
agreed with Cicero that too severe self-criticism had
robbed him of his natural vigour. But he was the
possessor of a solemn, weighty and chastened style,
which was also capable at times of genuine vehemence. He was an adherent of the Attic school and
an untimely death deprived him of his full meed of
honour, at least if we regard him as likely to have
acquired fresh qualities. Servius Sulpicius acquired
a great and well-deserved reputation by his three
speeches. Cassius Severus, if read with discrimination, will provide much that is worthy of imitation
if to his other merits he had added appropriateness
of tone and dignity of style, he would deserve a
place among the greatest. For his natural talents
are great, his gift of bitterness, wit and passion
remarkable, but he allowed the sharpness of his
temper to prevail over his judgment. Moreover,
though his jests are pungent enough, this very
pungency often turned the laugh against himself.
There are many other clever speakers, but it
would be a long task to deal with them all. Domitius
Afer and Julius Africanus are by far the most distinguished. The former is superior in art and in
every department of oratory, indeed he may he
ranked with the old orators without fear of contradiction. The latter shows greater energy, but is too
great a precisian in the choice of words, prone to
tediously long periods and somewhat extravagant in
his metaphors. There have been distinguished
talents even of more recent date. For example,
Trachalus was, as a rule, elevated and sufficiently
clear in his language one realised that his aims
were high, but he was better to listen to than to
read. For his voice was, in my experience, unique
in its beauty of tone, while his delivery would have
done credit to an actor, his action was full of grace
and he possessed every external advantage in profusion. Vibius Crispus, again, was well-balanced,
agreeable and born to charm, though he was better
in private than in public cases. Julius Secundus,
had he lived longer, would undoubtedly have attained
a great and enduring reputation. For he would have
acquired, as he was actually acquiring, all that was
lacking to his qualities, namely, a far greater
pugnacity and a closer attention to substance as well
as form. But, in spite of the untimeliness of his end,
he occupies a high place, thanks to his fluency, the
grace with which he set forth whatever he desired,
the lucidity, smoothness and beauty of his speech,
the propriety revealed in the use of words, even
when employed figuratively, and the point which
characterises even his most hazardous expressions.
Subsequent writers on the history of oratory will
find abundant material for praise among the orators
who flourish to-day for the law courts can boast
a glorious wealth of talent. Indeed, the consummate advocates of the present day are serious
rivals of the ancients, while enthusiastic effort
and lofty ideals lead many a young student to tread in their footsteps and imitate their
excellence. I have still to deal with writers on philosophy,
of whom Rome has so far produced but few who are
distinguished for their style. But Cicero, who is
great in every department of literature, stands out
as the rival of Plato in this department as well.
Brutus was an admirable writer on such themes, in
which he distinguished himself far more than in his
speeches he is equal to the serious nature of his
subject, and the reader realises that he feels what
he says. Cornelius Celsus, a follower of the Sextii,
wrote a number of philosophical works, which have
considerable grace and polish. Among the Stoics
Plautus is useful as giving a knowledge of the
subject. Among the Epicureans Catius is agreeable to read, though lacking in weight. I have
deliberately postponed the discussion of Seneca in
connexion with the various departments of literature
owing to the fact that there is a general, though
false, impression that I condemn and even detest
him. It is true that I had occasion to pass censure upon him when I was endeavouring to recall
students from a depraved style, weakened by every
kind of error, to a severer standard of taste. But
at that time Seneca's works were in the hands
of every young man, and my aim was not to ban his
reading altogether, but to prevent his being preferred to authors superior to himself, but whom he
was never tired of disparaging; for, being conscious
of the fact that his own style was very different from theirs, he was afraid that he would fail to
please those who admired them. But the young
men loved him rather than imitated him, and fell
as far below him as he fell below the ancients. For
I only wish they had equalled or at least approached
his level. But he pleased them for his faults alone,
and each individual sought to imitate such of those
faults as lay within his capacity to reproduce and
then brought reproach on his master by boasting
that he spoke in the genuine Senecan manner.
Seneca had many excellent qualities, a quick and
fertile intelligence with great industry and wide
knowledge, though as regards the last quality he
was often led into error by those whom he had
entrusted with the task of investigating certain
subjects on his behalf. He dealt with almost every
department of knowledge; for speeches, poems,
letters and dialogues all circulate under his name.
In philosophy he showed a lack of critical power,
but was none the less quite admirable in his
denunciations of vice. His works contain a number
of striking general reflexions and much that is
worth reading for edification; but his style is for
the most part corrupt and exceedingly dangerous,
for the very reason that its vices are so many and
attractive. One could wish that, while he relied on
his own intelligence, he had allowed himself to be
guided by the taste of others. For if he had only
despised all unnatural expressions and had not been
so passionately fond of all that was incorrect, if he
had not felt such affection for all that was his own,
and had not impaired the solidity of his matter by
striving after epigrammatic brevity, he would have
won the approval of the learned instead of the enthusiasm of boys. But even as it is, he deserves
to be read by those whose powers have been formed
and firmly moulded on the standards of a severer
taste, if only because he will exercise their critical
faculties in distinguishing between his merits and
his defects. For, as I have said, there is much in
him which we may approve, much even that we may
admire. Only we must be careful in our selection
would he had been as careful himself. For his
genius deserved to be devoted to better aims, since
what it does actually aim at, it succeeds in achieving. II. It is from these and other authors worthy of
our study that we must draw our stock of words, the
variety of our figures and our methods of composition,
while we must form our minds on the model of every
excellence. For there can be no doubt that in art
no small portion of our task lies in imitation, since,
although invention came first and is all-important, it
is expedient to imitate whatever has been invented
with success. And it is a universal rule of life that
we should wish to copy what we approve in others.
It is for this reason that boys copy the shapes of
letters that they may learn to write, and that
musicians take the voices of their teachers, painters
the works of their predecessors, and peasants the
principles of agriculture which have been proved in
practice, as models for their imitation. In fact, we
may note that the elementary study of every branch
of learning is directed by reference to some definite
standard that is placed before the learner. We
must, in fact, either be like or unlike those who
have proved their excellence. It is rare for nature
to produce such resemblance, which is more often
the result of imitation. But the very fact that in every subject the procedure to be followed is so
much more easy for us than it was for those who
had no model to guide them, is a positive drawback,
unless we use this dubious advantage with caution
and judgment. The first point, then, that we must realise is that
imitation alone is not sufficient, if only for the reason
that a sluggish nature is only too ready to rest
content with the inventions of others. For what
would have happened in the days when models were
not, if men had decided to do and think of nothing
that they did not know already The answer is
obvious nothing would ever have been discovered.
Why, then, is it a crime for us to discover something
new Were primitive men led to make so many
discoveries simply by the natural force of their
imagination, and shall we not then be spurred on to
search for novelty by the very knowledge that those
who sought of old were rewarded by success And
seeing that they, who had none to teach them anything, have handed down such store of knowledge
to posterity, shall we refuse to employ the experience
which we possess of some things, to discover yet
other things, and possess nought that is not owed to
the beneficent activity of others Shall we follow
the example of those painters whose sole aim is to
be able to copy pictures by using the ruler and the
measuring rod It is a positive disgrace to be
content to owe all our achievement to imitation.
For what, I ask again, would have been the result
if no one had done more than his predecessors
Livius Andronicus would mark our supreme
achievement in poetry and the annals of the Pontifices would be our ne plus ultra in history. We should still be sailing on rafts, and the art of painting
would be restricted to tracing a line round a shadow
thrown in the sunlight. Cast your eyes over the
whole of history; you will find that no art has
remained just as it was when it was discovered, nor
come to a standstill at its very birth, unless indeed
we are ready to pass special condensation on our
own generation on the ground that it is so barren of
invention that no further development is possible;
and it is undoubtedly true that no development is
possible for those who restrict themselves to imitation. But if we are forbidden to add anything to
the existing stock of knowledge, how can we ever
hope for the birth of our ideal orator For of all
the greatest orators with whom we are as yet acquainted, there is not one who has not some
deficiency or blemish. And even those who do
not aim at supreme excellence, ought to press
toward the mark rather than be content to follow
in the tracks of others. For the man whose aim
is to prove himself better than another, even if he
does not surpass him, may hope to equal him. But
he can never hope to equal him, if he thinks it his
duty merely to tread in his footsteps for the mere
follower must always lag behind. Further, it is
generally easier to make some advance than to
repeat what has been done by others, since there
is nothing harder than to produce an exact likeness,
and nature herself has so far failed in this endeavour
that there is always some difference which enables
us to distinguish even the things which seem most
like and most equal to one another. Again, whatever is like another object, must necessarily be
inferior to the object of its imitation, just as the shadow is inferior to the substance, the portrait to
the features which it portrays, and the acting of the
player to the feelings which he endeavours to reproduce. The same is true of oratory. For the models
which we select for imitation have a genuine and
natural force, whereas all imitation is artificial and
moulded to a purpose which was not that of the
original orator. This is the reason why declamations
have less life and vigour than actual speeches, since
the subject is fictitious in the one and real in the
other. Again, the greatest qualities of the orator
are beyond all imitation, by which I mean, talent,
invention, force, facility and all the qualities which
are independent of art. Consequently, there are
many who, after excerpting certain words from
published speeches or borrowing certain particular
rhythms, think that they have produced a perfect
copy of the works which they have read, despite
the fact that words become obsolete or current
with the lapse of years, the one sure standard being
contemporary usage; and they are not good or
bad in virtue of their inherent nature for in themselves they are no more than mere sounds, but
solely in virtue of the aptitude and propriety or
the reverse with which they are arranged, while
rhythmical composition must be adapted to the
theme in hand and will derive its main charm from
its variety. Consequently the nicest judgment is required in
the examination of everything connected with this
department of study. First we must consider whom
to imitate. For there are many who have shown a
passionate desire to imitate the worst and most
decadent authors. Secondly, we must consider what it is that we should set ourselves to imitate in the
authors thus chosen. For even great authors have
their blemishes, for which they have been censured
by competent critics and have even reproached each
other. I only wish that imitators were more likely
to improve on the good things than to exaggerate
the blemishes of the authors whom they seek to
copy. And even those who have sufficient critical
acumen to avoid the faults of their models will not
find it sufficient to produce a copy of their merits,
amounting to no more than a superficial resemblance,
or rather recalling those sloughs which, according to
Epicurus, are continually given off by material things.
But this is just what happens to those who mould
themselves on the first impressions derived from the
style of their model, without devoting themselves to
a thorough investigation of its good qualities, and,
despite the brilliance of their imitation and the close
resemblance of their language and rhythm, not only
fail absolutely to attain the force of style and invention
possessed by the original, but as a rule degenerate
into something worse, and achieve merely those faults
which are hardest to distinguish from virtues they
are turgid instead of grand, bald instead of concise,
and rash instead of courageous, while extravagance
takes the place of wealth, over-emphasis the place of
harmony and negligence of simplicity. As a result,
those who flaunt tasteless and insipid thoughts,
couched in an uncouth and inharmonious form, think
that they are the equals of the ancients; those who
lack ornament and epigram, pose as Attic; those
who darken their meaning by the abruptness with
which they close their periods, count themselves the
superiors of Sallust and Thucydides; those who are dreary and jejune, think that they are serious rivals
to Pollio, while those who are tame and listless, if
only they can produce long enough periods, swear
that this is just the manner in which Cicero would
have spoken. I have known some who thought that
they had produced a brilliant imitation of the style
of that divine orator, by ending their periods with
the phrase esse videatur. Consequently it is of the
first importance that every student should realise
what it is that he is to imitate, and should know
why it is good. The next step is for each student to consult his
own powers when he shoulders his burden. For
there are some things which, though capable of
imitation, may be beyond the capacity of any given
individual, either because his natural gifts are insufficient or of a different character. The man whose
talent is for the plain style should not seek only
what is bold and rugged, nor yet should he who has
vigour without control suffer himself through love of
subtlety at once to waste his natural energy and
fail to attain the elegance at which he aims for
there is nothing so unbecoming as delicacy wedded
to ruggedness. True, I did express the opinion
that the instructor whose portrait I painted in my
second book, should not confine himself to teaching
those things for which he perceived his individual
pupils to have most aptitude. For it is his further
duty to foster whatever good qualities he may perceive in his pupils, to make good their deficiencies
as far as may be, to correct their faults and turn
them to better things. For he is the guide and
director of the minds of others. It is a harder task
to mould one's own nature. But not even our ideal teacher, however much he may desire that
everything that is correct should prevail in his
school to the fullest extent, will waste his labour in
attempting to develop qualities to the attainment of
which he perceives nature's gifts to be opposed. It is also necessary to avoid the fault to which the
majority of students are so prone, namely, the idea
that in composing speeches we should imitate the
poets and historians, and in writing history or poetry
should copy orators and declaimers. Each branch
of literature has its own laws and its own appropriate
character. Comedy does not seek to increase its
height by the buskin and tragedy does not wear
the slipper of comedy. But all forms of eloquence
have something in common, and it is to the imitation
of this common element that our efforts should be
confined. There is a further fault to which those persons
are liable who devote themselves entirely to the
imitation of one particular style if the rude vigour
of some particular author takes their fancy, they
cling to it even when the case on which they are
engaged calls for an easy and flowing style; if, on
the other hand, it is a simple or agreeable style that
claims their devotion, they fail to meet the heavy
demands of severe and weighty cases. For not only
do cases differ in their general aspect, but one part
of a case may differ from another, and some things
require a gentle and others a violent style, some
require an impetuous and others a calm diction, while
in some cases it is necessary to instruct and in others
to move the audience, in all these instances dissimilar and different methods being necessary. Consequently I should be reluctant even to advise a student to select one particular author to follow
through thick and thin. Demosthenes is by far the
most perfect of Greek orators, yet there are some
things which others have said better in some contexts
as against the many things which he has said better
than others. But it does not follow that because we
should select one author for special imitation, he
should be our only model. What then Is it not
sufficient to model our every utterance on Cicero
For my own part, I should consider it sufficient, if
I could always imitate him successfully. But what
harm is there in occasionally borrowing the vigour of
Caesar, the vehemence of Caelius, the precision of
Pollio or the sound judgment of Calvus For quite
apart from the fact that a wise man should always,
if possible, make whatever is best in each individual
author his own, we shall find that, in view of the
extreme difficulty of our subject, those who fix their
eyes on one model only will always find some one
quality which it is almost impossible to acquire therefrom. Consequently, since it is practically impossible
for mortal powers to produce a perfect and complete
copy of any one chosen author, we shall do well to
keep a number of different excellences before our
eyes, so that different qualities from different authors
may impress themselves on our minds, to be adopted
for use in the place that becomes them best. But imitation for I must repeat this point again
and again should not be confined merely to words.
We must consider the appropriateness with which
those orators handle the circumstances and persons
involved in the various cases in which they were
engaged, and observe the judgment and powers of
arrangement which they reveal, and the manner in which everything they say, not excepting those
portions of their speeches which seem designed
merely to delight their audience, is concentrated on
securing the victory over their opponents. We must
note their procedure in the exordium, the method
and variety of their statement of facts, the power
displayed in proof and refutation, the skill revealed
in their appeal to every kind of emotion, and the
manner in which they make use of popular applause
to serve their case, applause which is most honourable when it is spontaneous and not deliberately
courted. If we have thoroughly appreciated all these
points, we shall be able to imitate our models with
accuracy. But the man who to these good qualities
adds his own, that is to say, who makes good deficiencies and cuts down whatever is redundant, will
be the perfect orator of our search; and it is now
above all times that such perfection should be
attained when there are before us so many more
models of oratorical excellence than were available
for those who have thus far achieved the highest
success. For this glory also shall be theirs, that
men shall say of them that while they surpassed
their predecessors, they also taught those who came
after. 