The next subject which comes up for discussion is that of contrary laws. For all writers
of text-books are agreed that in such cases there
are two bases involving the letter and the intention
of the law respectively. This view is justified by
the fact that, when one law contradicts another, both
parties attack the letter and raise the question of
intention, while the point in dispute, as regards each
law, is whether we should be guided by it at all. But
it is clear to everybody that one law cannot contradict
another in principle since if there were two different
principles, one law would cancel the other, and
that the laws in question are brought into collision
purely by the accidents of chance. When two laws clash, they may be of a similar
nature, as for instance if we have to compare two
cases in which a tyrannicide and a brave man are
given the choice of their reward, both being granted
the privilege of choosing whatever they desire. In
such a case we compare the deserts of the claimants,
the occasions of the respective acts and the nature
of the rewards claimed. Or the same law may be
in conflict with itself, as in the case where we have
two brave men, two tyrannicides or two ravished
women, when the question must turn either on time
that is, whose claim has priority or on quality that
is, whose claim is the more just. Again, we may
have a conflict between diverse, similar or dissimilar
laws. Diverse laws are those against which arguments may be brought without reference to any contradictory law. The following theme will provide an
example. In this case, even though
there be no other law covering the case, we may
raise the question whether a hero ought to be
granted anything he chooses to claim. Again, many
conclusive arguments may be brought against the
letter of the law restricting the movements of the
magistrate for example, a fire may have broken out
in the citadel, or a sally against the enemy may have
been necessary. Laws are styled similar when nothing can be opposed to one except the other. Here are two conflicting laws for a woman's statue
cannot under any other circumstances be erected in
the gymnasium, while there is no other circumstance
which can bar the erection of the statue of a
tyrannicide in the gymnasium. Laws are styled
dissimilar when many arguments can be urged against
one, while the only point which can be urged against
the other is the actual subject of dispute. An
example is provided by the case in which a brave
man demands the pardon of a deserter as his reward.
For there are many arguments, as I have shown
above, which can be urged against the law permitting
a hero to choose whatever reward he will, but
the letter of the law dealing with the crime of
desertion cannot be overthrown under any circumstances save the choice of rewards to which I have
just referred. Again, the point of law is either admitted by
both parties or disputed. If it be admitted, the
questions which are raised will as a rule be such
as the following. Which of the two laws is the
most stringent Does it concern gods or men, the
state or private individuals, reward or punishment,
great things or small Does it permit, forbid or
command Another common question is which of
the two laws is the oldest; but the most important
question is which of the two laws will suffer less by
its contravention, as for example in the case of the
hero and the deserter just mentioned, in which case,
if the deserter is not put to death, the whole law is
ignored, whereas, if he be put to death, the hero
will still have another choice left open to him. It
is, however, of the utmost importance to consider
which course is best from the point of view of
morality and justice, a problem for the solution of
which no general rules can be laid down, as it will
depend on the special circumstances of the case. If,
on the other hand, the point of law is disputed, either
one party or both in turn will argue the point. Take
the following case as an example. Here the father claims his right
over the son, while the son, in virtue of his new position
as patron, denies that his father possessed the rights
of a father, because he was in the power of his patron. Laws containing two provisions may conflict with
themselves in exactly the same way as two laws may
conflict. The following will serve as an illustration. All that I have
said about laws will also apply to decrees of the
senate. If decrees of the senate conflict with one
another or with the laws, the basis will be the same
as if laws only were concerned. 