Let no one however demand from me a rigid
code of rules such as most authors of textbooks have
laid down, or ask me to impose on students of rhetoric a system of laws immutable as fate, a system in
which injunctions as to the exordium and its nature
lead the way; then come the statement of facts and
the laws to be observed in this connexion next the
proposition or, as some prefer, the digression, followed
by prescriptions as to the order in which the various
questions should be discussed, with all the other rules,
which some speakers follow as though they had no choice but to regard them as orders and as if it were
a crime to take any other line. If the whole of rhetoric could be thus embodied in one compact code,
it would be an easy task of little compass but
most rules are liable to be altered by the nature of
the case, circumstances of time and place, and by
hard necessity itself. Consequently the all-important
gift for an orator is a wise adaptability since he is
called upon to meet the most varied emergencies. What if you should instruct a general, as often as he
marshals his troops for battle, to draw up his front in
line, advance his wings to left and right, and station
his cavalry to protect his flank This will perhaps be
the best plan, if circumstances allow. But it may
have to be modified owing to the nature of the ground,
if, for instance, he is confronted by a mountain, if a
river bars his advance, or his movements are hampered
by hills, woods or broken country. Or again it may
be modified by the character of the enemy or the
nature of the crisis by which he is faced. On one
occasion he will fight in line, on another in column,
on one he will use his auxiliary troops, on another his
legionaries; while occasionally a feint of flight may
win the day. So, too, with the rules of oratory. Is
the exordium necessary or superfluous should it be
long or short addressed entirely to the judge or
sometimes directed to some other quarter by the
employment of some figure of speech Should the
statement of facts be concise or developed at some
length continuous or divided into sections and
should it follow the actual or an artificial order of
events The orator will find the answers to all these
questions in the circumstances of the case. So, too,
with the order in which questions should be discussed, since in any given debate it may often suit one party
best that such and such a question come up first, while their opponents would be best suited by another.
For these rules have not the formal authority of laws
or decrees of the plebs, but are, with all they contain,
the children of expediency. I will not deny that it
is generally expedient to conform to such rules, otherwise I should not be writing now; but if our friend
expediency suggests some other course to us, why,
we shall disregard the authority of the professors
and follow her. For my part above all things that in all his pleadings the orator should keep two
things constantly in view, what is becoming and what
is expedient. But it is often expedient and occasionally becoming to make some modification in the
time-honoured order. We see the same thing in
pictures and statues. Dress, expression and attitude
are frequently varied. The body when held bolt
upright has but little grace, for the face looks straight
forward, the arms hang by the side, the feet are
joined and the whole figure is stiff from top to toe.
But that curve, I might almost call it motion, with
which we are so familiar, gives an impression of action
and animation. So, too, the hands will not always be
represented in the same position, and the variety
given to the expression will be infinite. Some figures
are represented as running or rushing forward, others
sit or recline, some are nude, others clothed, while
some again are half-dressed, half-naked. Where can
we find a more violent and elaborate attitude than
that of the Discobolus of Myron Yet the critic who disapproved of the figure because it was not upright,
would merely show his utter failure to understand the
sculptor's art, in which the very novelty and difficulty
of execution is what most deserves our praise. A
similar impression of grace and charm is produced by
rhetorical figures, whether they be figures of thought
or figures of speech. For they involve a certain departure from the straight line and have the merit of
variation from the ordinary usage. In a picture the
full face is most attractive. But Apelles painted
Antigonus in profile, to conceal the blemish caused
by the loss of one eye. So, too, in speaking, there
are certain things which have to be concealed, either
because they ought not to be disclosed or because
they cannot be expressed as they deserve. Timanthes,
who was, I think, a native of Cythnus, provides an
example of this in the picture with which he won the
victory over Colotes of Teos. It represented the
sacrifice of Iphigenia, and the artist had depicted an
expression of grief on the face of Calchas and of still
greater grief on that of Ulysses, while he had given
Menelaus an agony of sorrow beyond which his art
could not go. Having exhausted his powers of emotional expression he was at a loss to portray the
father's face as it deserved, and solved the problem
by veiling his head and leaving his sorrow to the
imagination of the spectator. Sallust did something similar when he wrote It
has always, therefore, been my custom not to tie myself down to universal or general rules this being the
nearest equivalent I can find for the Greek catholic
rules. For rules are rarely of such a kind that their
validity cannot be shaken and overthrown in some particular or other. But I must reserve each of these
points for fuller treatment in its proper place. For
the present I will only say that I do not want young
men to think their education complete when they
have mastered one of the small text-books of which
so many are in circulation, or to ascribe a talismanic
value to the arbitrary decrees of theorists. the art
of speaking can only be attained by hard work and
assiduity of study, by a variety of exercises and repeated trial, the highest prudence and unfailing
quickness of judgement. But rules are helpful all the
same so long as they indicate the direct road and do
not restrict us absolutely to the ruts made by others.
For he who thinks it an unpardonable sin to leave the
old, old track, must be content to move at much the
same speed as a tight-rope walker. Thus, for example,
we often leave a paved military road to take a short
cut or, finding that the direct route is impossible
owing to floods having broken down the bridges, are
forced to make a circuit, while if our house is on fire
and flames bar the way to the front door, we make
our escape by breaking through a party wall. The
orator's task covers a large ground, is extremely
varied and develops some new aspect almost every
day, so that the last word on the subject will never
have been said. I shall however try to set forth the
traditional rules and to point out their best features,
mentioning the changes, additions and subtractions
which seem desirable. 