Clearness results above all from propriety in
the use of words. But propriety is capable of more
than one interpretation. In its primary sense it
means calling things by their right names, and is
consequently sometimes to be avoided, for our
language must not be obscene, unseemly or mean.
Language may be described as mean when it is
beneath the dignity of the subject or the rank of
the speaker. Some orators fall into serious error
in their eagerness to avoid this fault, and are afraid
of all words that are in ordinary use, even although
they may be absolutely necessary for their purpose.
There was, for example, the man who in the course
of a speech spoke of a meaningless
phrase intelligible only to himself. Cassius Severus,
however, by way of deriding his affectation, explained
that he meant Spanish broom. Nor do I see why
a certain distinguished orator thought a more elegant phrase than the
word which he avoided. But while there is no
special merit in the form of propriety which consists
in calling things by their real names, it is a fault
to fly to the opposite extreme. This fault we call
impropriety, while the Greeks call it As
examples I may cite the Virgilian, or the phrase,
which I noted had been corrected by Cicero in a
speech of Dolabella's, or again,
phrases of a kind that win praise from some of
our contemporaries, such as, On the other hand, everything that
lacks appropriateness will not necessarily suffer from
the fault of positive impropriety, because there are, in
the first place, many things which have no proper
term either in Greek or Latin. For example, the
verb iaculari is specially used in the sense of whereas there is no special verb
appropriated to the throwing of a ball or a stake.
So, too, while lapidare has the obvious meaning of there is no special word to describe
the throwing of clods or potsherds. Hence abuse or
catachresis of words becomes necessary, while metaphor, also, which is the supreme ornament of oratory,
applies words to things with which they have
strictly no connexion. Consequently propriety turns
not on the actual term, but on the meaning of the
term, and must be tested by the touchstone of the
understanding, not of the ear. The second sense
in which the word propriety is used occurs when
there are a number of things all called by the same
name in this case the original term from which
the others are derived is styled the proper term. For example, the word vertex means a whirl of
water, or of anything else that is whirled in a like
manner then, owing to the fashion of coiling the
hair, it comes to mean the top of the head, while
finally, from this sense it derives the meaning of
the highest point of a mountain. All these things
may correctly be called vertices, but the proper use
of the term is the first. So, too, solea and tuidus
are employed as names of fish, to mention no other
cases. The third kind of propriety is found in
the case where a thing which serves a number
of purposes has a special name in some one particular context; for example, the proper term for
a funeral song is naenia, and for the general's tent
augurale. Again, a term which is common to a
number of things may be applied in a proper or
special sense to some one of them. Thus we use
urbs in the special sense of Rome, venales in the
special sense of newly-purchased slaves, and Corinthia in the special sense of bronzes, although
there are other cities besides Rome, and many
other things which may be styled venales besides
slaves, and gold and silver are found at Corinth
as well as bronze. But the use of such terms
implies no special excellence in an orator. There
is, however, a form of propriety of speech which
deserves the highest praise, that is to say, the
employment of words with the maximum of significance, as, for instance, when Cato said that or as
Virgil spoke of a and Horace
of the and Some
also include under this head that form of propriety which is derived from characteristic epithets,
such as in the Virgilian phrases, or But of
this sort of propriety I shall have to speak elsewhere. Propriety is also made to include the appropriate use of words in metaphor, while at times the
salient characteristic of an individual comes to be
attached to him as a proper name thus Fabius was
called the Delayer, on account of the
most remarkable of his many military virtues. Some,
perhaps, may think that words which mean more
than they actually say deserve mention in connexion
with clearness, since they assist the understanding.
I, however, prefer to place emphasis among the
ornaments of oratory, since it does not make a thing
intelligible, but merely more intelligible. Obscurity, on the other hand, results from the
employment of obsolete words, as, for instance, if
an author should search the records of the priests,
the earliest treaties and the works of long-forgotten
writers with the deliberate design of collecting
words that no man living understands. For there
are persons who seek to gain a reputation for erudition by such means as this, in order that they
may be regarded as the sole depositories of certain
forms of knowledge. Obscurity may also be produced by the use of words which are more familiar
in certain districts than in others, or which are
of a technical character, such as the wind called or a or in malo cosanum.
Such expressions should be avoided if we are pleading before a judge who is ignorant of their meaning,
or, if used, should be explained, as may have to be
done in the case of what are called homonyms. For example, the word taurus may be unintelligible unless we make it clear whether we are speaking of
a bull, or a mountain, or a constellation, or the name
of a man, or the root of a tree. A greater source of obscurity is, however, to be
found in the construction and combination of words,
and the ways in which this may occur are still more
numerous. Therefore, a sentence should never be
so long that it is impossible to follow its drift, nor
should its conclusion be unduly postponed by transposition or an excessive use of hyperbaton. Still
worse is the result when the order of the words is
confused as in the line Again, parenthesis, so often employed by orators
and historians, and consisting in the insertion of one
sentence in the midst of another, may seriously
hinder the understanding of a passage, unless the
insertion is short. For example, in the passage
where Vergil describes a colt, the words are followed by a number of remarks of a totally
different form, and it is only four lines later that
the poet returns to the point and says, Above all, ambiguity must be avoided, and by
ambiguity I mean not merely the kind of which
I have already spoken, where the sense is uncertain,
as in the clause Chremetem audivi percussisse Demean, but also that form of ambiguity which, although
it does not actually result in obscuring the sense,
falls into the same verbal error as if a man should say
visum a se hominem librum scribentem that he had
seen a man writing a book. For although it is
clear that the book was being written by the man,
the sentence is badly put together, and its author
has made it as ambiguous as he could. Again, some writers introduce a whole host of
useless words; for, in their eagerness to avoid
ordinary methods of expression, and allured by
false ideals of beauty they wrap up everything in a
multitude of words simply and solely because they
are unwilling to make a direct and simple statement of the facts and then they link up and
involve one of those long-winded clauses with others
like it, and extend their periods to a length beyond
the compass of mortal breath. Some even expend
an infinity of toil to acquire this vice, which, by the
way, is nothing new for I learn from the pages of
Livy that there was one, a teacher, who instructed
his pupils to make all they said obscure, using the
Greek word  It was this
same habit that gave rise to the famous words of
praise, Others are consumed with a
passion for brevity and omit words which are
actually necessary to the sense, regarding it as a
matter of complete indifference whether their meaning is intelligible to others, so long as they know
what they mean themselves. For my own part, I
regard as useless words which make such a demand
upon the ingenuity of the hearer. Others, again,
succeed in committing the same fault by a perverse misuse of figures. Worst of all are the
phrases which the Greeks call that is to
say, expressions which, though their meaning is
obvious enough on the surface, have a secret meaning, as for example in the phrase cum ductus est
caecus secundam viam stare, or where the man, who
is supposed in the scholastic theme to have torn his
own limbs with his teeth, is said to have lain upon
himself Such expressions are regarded as ingenious,
daring and eloquent, simply because of their ambiguity, and quite a number of persons have become
infected by the belief that a passage which requires
a commentator must for that very reason be a
masterpiece of elegance. Nay, there is even a class
of hearer who find a special pleasure in such passages; for the fact that they can provide an answer
to the riddle fills them with an ecstasy of self-congratulation, as if they had not merely heard the
phrase, but invented it. For my own part, I regard clearness as the first
essential of a good style there must be propriety
in our words, their order must be straightforward,
the conclusion of the period must not be long postponed, there must be nothing lacking and nothing
superfluous. Thus our language will be approved
by the learned and clear to the uneducated. I am
speaking solely of clearness in style, as I have
already dealt with clearness in the presentation
of facts in the rules I laid down for the statement
of the case. But the general method is the same
in both. For if what we say is not less nor more
than is required, and is clear and systematically
arranged, the whole matter will be plain and obvious
even to a not too attentive audience. For we must never forget that the attention of the judge is not
always so keen that he will dispel obscurities without assistance, and bring the light of his intelligence
to bear on the dark places of our speech. On the
contrary, lie will have many other thoughts to distract him unless what we say is so clear that our
words will thrust themselves into his mind even
when he is not giving us his attention, just as the
sunlight forces itself upon the eyes. Therefore
our aim must be not to put him in a position
to understand our argument, but to force him to
understand it. Consequently we shall frequently
repeat anything which we think the judge has
failed to take in as he should. We shall say, for
example, ; for the pretended admission of a fault
on our part creates an excellent impression. 