It is generally and not unreasonably regarded
as the sign of a good teacher that he should be able
to differentiate between the abilities of his respective
pupils and to know their natural bent. The gifts of
nature are infinite in their variety, and mind differs
from mind almost as much as body from body. This
is clear from a consideration of the orators themselves, who differ in style to such an extent that no
one is like another, in spite of the fact that numbers
have modelled their style on that of their favorite
authors. Many again think it useful to direct their
instruction to the fostering of natural advantages and
to guide the talents of their pupils along the lines
which they instinctively tend to follow. Just as an
expert gymnast, when he enters a gymnasium full of
boys, after testing body and mind in every way, is
able to decide for what class of athletic contest they
should be trained, even so, they say, a teacher of
oratory after careful observation of a boy's stylistic
preferences, be they for terseness and polish, energy,
dignity, charm, roughness, brilliance or wit, will so
adapt his instructions to individual needs that each
pupil will be pushed forward in the sphere for which
his talents seem specially to design him; for nature,
when cultivated, goes from strength to strength,
while he who runs counter to her bent is ineffective
in those branches of the art for which he is less
suited and weakens the talents which he seemed
born to employ. Now, since the critic who is
guided by his reason is free to dissent even from received opinions, I must insist that to my thinking this view is only partially true. It is undoubtedly necessary to note the individual gifts of
each boy, and no one would ever convince me
that it is not desirable to differentiate courses of
study with this in view. One boy will be better
adapted for the study of history, another for poetry,
another for law, while some perhaps had better be
packed off to the country. The teacher of rhetoric
will distinguish such special aptitudes, just as our
gymnast will turn one pupil into a runner, another
into a boxer or wrestler or an expert at some other
of the athletic accomplishments for which prizes are
awarded at the sacred games. But on the other
hand, he who is destined for the bar must study not
one department merely, but must perfect himself in
all the accomplishments which his profession demands, even though some of them may seem too hard
for him when he approaches them as a learner. For if
natural talent alone were sufficient, education might
be dispensed with. Suppose we are given a pupil
who, like so many, is of depraved tastes and swollen
with his own conceit; shall we suffer him to go his
own sweet way If a boy's disposition is naturally
dry and jejune, ought we not to feed it up or at any
rate clothe it in fairer apparel For, if in some cases
it is necessary to remove certain qualities, surely
there are others where we may be permitted to add
what is lacking. Not that I would set myself against
the will of nature. No innate good quality should be
neglected, but defects must be made good and weaknesses made strong. When Isocrates, the prince of
instructors, whose works proclaim his eloquence no
less than his pupils testify to his excellence as a teacher, gave his opinion of Ephorus and Theopompus
to the effect that the former needed the spur and the
latter the curb, what was his meaning Surely not
that the sluggish temperament of the one and the
headlong ardour of the other alike required modification by instruction, but rather that each would gain
from an admixture of the qualities of the other. In the case of weaker understandings however some
concession must be made and they should be directed
merely to follow the call of their nature, since thus
they will be more effective in doing the only thing
that lies in their power. But if we are fortunate
enough to meet with richer material, such as justifies
us in the hope of producing a real orator, we must
leave no oratorical virtue uncared for. For though he
will necessarily have a natural bent for some special
department of oratory, he will not feel repelled by
the others, and by sheer application will develop his
other qualities until they equal those in which he
naturally excels. The skilled gymnast will once again
provide us with a parallel if he undertakes to train
a pancratiast, he will not merely teach him how
to use his fists or his heels, nor will he restrict
his instructions to the holds in wrestling, giving
special attention to certain tricks of this kind,
but will train him in every department of the
science. Some will no doubt be incapable of attaining proficiency in certain exercises; these must
specialise on those which lie within their powers. For there are two things which he must be most
careful to avoid first, he must not attempt the impossible, secondly he must not switch off his pupil
from what he can do well to exercises for which he is
less well suited. But if his pupil is like the famous Nicostratus, whom we saw when he was old and we
were boys, he will train him equally in every department of the science and will make him a champion
both in boxing and wrestling, like Nicostratus himself
who won the prize for both contests within a few days
of each other. And how much more important is the
employment of such methods where our future orator
is concerned It is not enough to be able to speak
with terseness, subtlety or vehemence, any more than
it would be for a singing master to excel in the upper,
middle or lower register only, or in particular sections
of these registers alone. Eloquence is like a harp
and will never reach perfection, unless all its strings
be taut and in tune. 