I undertook my present task, Marcellus Victorius,
mainly to gratify your request, but also with a view
to assist the more earnest of our young men as far
as lay in my power, while latterly the energy with
which I have devoted myself to my labours has
been inspired by the almost imperative necessity
imposed by the office conferred on me, though
all the while I have had an eye to my own
personal pleasure. For I thought that this work
would be the most precious part of the inheritance
that would fall to my son, whose ability was so
remarkable that it called for the most anxious
cultivation on the part of his father. Thus if, as
would have been but just and devoutly to be
wished, the fates had torn me from his side, he
would still have been able to enjoy the benefit of
his father's instruction. Night and day I pursued
this design, and strove to hasten its completion in
the fear that death might cut me off with my task
unfinished, when misfortune overwhelmed me with
such suddenness, that the success of my labours now
interests no one less than myself. A second bereavement has fallen upon me, and I have lost him of
whom I had formed the highest expectations, and
in whom I reposed all the hopes that should solace
my old age. What is there left for me to do Or what further use can I hope to be on earth, when
heaven thus frowns upon me For it so chances
that just at the moment when I began my book on
the causes of the decline of eloquence, I was stricken
by a like affliction. Better had I thrown that illomened work and all my ill-starred learning upon
the flames of that untimely pyre that was to consume
the darling of my heart, and had not sought to
burden my unnatural persistence in this wicked
world with the fatigue of fresh labours For what
father with a spark of proper feeling would pardon
me for having the heart to pursue my researches
further, and would not hate me for my insensibility,
had I other use for my voice than to rail against
high heaven for having suffered me to outlive all
my nearest and dearest, and to testify that providence deigns not at all to watch over this earth of
ours If this is not proved by my own misfortune
and yet my only fault is that I still live, it is most
surely manifest in theirs, who were cut off thus
untimely; their mother was taken from me earlier
still, she had borne me two sons ere the completion of
her nineteenth year; but for her, though she too died
most untimely, death was a blessing. Yet for me her
death alone was such a blow that thereafter no good
fortune could bring me true happiness. For she had
every virtue that is given to woman to possess, and
left her husband a prey to irremediable grief; nay,
so young was she when death took her, that if her
age be compared with mine, her decease was like
the loss not merely of a wife, but of a daughter.
Still her children survived her, and I, too, lived on
by some unnatural ordinance of fate, which for all
its perversity was what she herself desired; and thus by her swift departure from this life she escaped
tile worst of tortures. My youngest boy was barely
five, when he was the first to leave me, robbing me
as it were of one of my two eyes. I have no desire
to flaunt my woes in the public gaze, nor to exaggerate the cause I have for tears; would that I had
some means to make it less But how can I forget
the charm of his face, the sweetness of his speech,
his first flashes of promise, and his actual possession
of a calm and, incredible though it may seem, a
powerful mind. Such a child would have captivated
my affections, even had he been another's. Nor was
this all; to enhance my agony the malignity of
designing fortune had willed that he should devote
all his love to me, preferring me to his nurses, to
his grandmother who brought him up, and all those
who, as a rule, win the special affection of infancy.
I am, therefore, grateful to the grief that came to
me some few months before his loss in the death
of his mother, the best of women, whose virtues
were beyond all praise. For I have less reason to
weep my own fate than to rejoice at hers. After these calamities all my hopes, all my delight
were centred on my little Quintilian, and he might
have sufficed to console me. For his gifts were not
merely in the bud like those of his brother as
early as his ninth birthday he had put forth sure
and well-formed fruit. By my own sorrows, by the
testimony of my own sad heart, by his departed
spirit, the deity at whose shrine my grief does
worship, I swear that I discerned in him such talent,
not merely in receiving instruction, although in all
my wide experience I have never seen his like, nor
in his power of spontaneous application, to which his teachers can bear witness, but such upright, pious,
humane and generous feelings, as alone might have
sufficed to fill me with the dread of the fearful
thunder-stroke that has smitten me down for it
is a matter of common observation that those who
ripen early die young, and that there is some malign
influence that delights in cutting short the greatest
promise and refusing to permit our joys to pass
beyond the bound allotted to mortal man. He
possessed every incidental advantage as well, a
pleasing and resonant voice, a sweetness of speech,
and a perfect correctness in pronouncing every letter
both in Greek and Latin, as though either were his
native tongue. But all these were but the promise
of greater things. He had finer qualities, courage
and dignity, and the strength to resist both fear
and pain. What fortitude he showed during an illness of eight months, till all his physicians marvelled
at him How he consoled me during his last
moments. How even in the wanderings of delirium
did his thoughts recur to his lessons and his literary
studies, even when his strength was sinking and he
was no longer ours to claim Child of my vain
hopes, did I see your eyes fading in death and your
breath take its last flight Had I the heart to
receive your fleeting spirit, as I embraced your cold
pale body, and to live on breathing the common air.
Justly do I endure the agony that now is mine, and
the thoughts that torment me. Have I lost you at
the moment when adoption by a consular had given
hope that you would rise to all the high offices of
state, when you were destined to be the son-in-law
of your uncle the praetor, and gave promise of
rivalling the eloquence of your grandsire and do I your father survive only to weep May my endurance not my will to live, for that is gone from me
prove me worthy of you through all my remaining
years. For it is in vain that we impute all our ills
to fortune. No man grieves long save through his
own fault. But I still live, and must find something
to make life tolerable, and must needs put faith in
the verdict of the wise, who held that literature
alone can provide true solace in adversity. Yet, if
ever the violence of my present grief subside and
admit the intrusion of some other thought on so
many sorrowful reflexions, I may with good cause
ask pardon for the delay in bringing my work to
completion. Who can wonder that my studies have
been interrupted, when the real marvel is that they
have not been broken off altogether Should
certain portions therefore betray a lack of finish
compared with what was begun in the days when
my affliction was less profound, I would ask that the
imperfections should be regarded with indulgence,
as being due to the cruel tyranny of fortune, which,
if it has not utterly extinguished, has at any rate
weakened such poor powers of intellect as I once
possessed. But for this very reason I must rouse
myself to face my task with greater spirit, since it
is easy to despise fortune, though it may be hard
to bear her blows. For there is nothing left that
she can do to me, since out of my calamities she
has wrought for me a security which, full of sorrow
though it be, is such that nothing can shake it.
And the very fact that I have no personal interest
in persevering with my present work, but am moved
solely by the desire to serve others, if indeed anything that I write can be of such service, is a reason for regarding my labours with an indulgent eye.
Alas I shall bequeath it, like my patrimony, for
others than those to whom it was my design to
leave it. 