Reading remains for consideration. In
this connexion there is much that can only be
taught in actual practice, as for instance when the
boy should take breath, at what point he should
introduce a pause into a line, where the sense ends
or begins, when the voice should be raised or
lowered, what modulation should be given to each
phrase, and when he should increase or slacken
speed, or speak with greater or less energy. In
this portion of my work I will give but one golden
rule to do all these things, he must understand
what he reads. But above all his reading must be
manly, combining dignity and charm; it must be
different from the reading of prose, for poetry is
song and poets claim to be singers. But this fact
does not justify degeneration into sing-song or the
effeminate modulations now in vogue there is an
excellent saying on this point attributed to Gaius
Caesar while he was still a boy Again I do not, like some teachers, wish character
as revealed by speeches to be indicated as it is by
the comic actor, though I think that there should
be some modulation of the voice to distinguish such
passages from those where the poet is speaking in
person. There are other points where there is much
need of instruction above all, unformed minds
which are liable to be all the more deeply impressed
by what they learn in their days of childish ignorance, must learn not merely what is eloquent;
it is even more important that they should study
what is morally excellent. It is therefore an admirable practice which now
prevails, to begin by reading Homer and Vergil,
although the intelligence needs to be further developed for the full appreciation of their merits but
there is plenty of time for that since the boy will
read them more than once. In the meantime let his
mind be lifted by the sublimity of heroic verse,
inspired by the greatness of its theme and imbued
with the loftiest sentiments. The reading of tragedy
also is useful, and lyric poets will provide nourishment for the mind, provided not merely the authors
be carefully selected, but also the passages from
their works which are to be read. For the Greek lyric
poets are often licentious and even in Horace there
are passages which I should be unwilling to explain
to a class. Elegiacs, however, more especially erotic
elegy, and hendecasyllables, which are merely sections
of Sotadean verse concerning which latter I need
give no admonitions, should be entirely banished, if
possible; if not absolutely banished, they should be
reserved for pupils of a less impressionable age. As to
comedy, whose contribution to eloquence may be of
no small importance, since it is concerned with every
kind of character and emotion, I will shortly point
out in its due places what use can in my opinion
be made of it in the education of boys. As soon as
we have no fear of contaminating their morals, it
should take its place among the subjects which it is
specially desirable to read. I speak of Menander,
though I would not exclude others. For Latin
authors will also be of some service. But the subjects selected for lectures to boys should be those
which will enlarge the mind and provide the greatest nourishment to the intellect. Life is quite long
enough for the subsequent study of those other subjects which are concerned with matters of interest
solely to learned men. But even the old Latin poets
may be of great value, in spite of the fact that their
strength lies in their natural talent rather than in
their art above all they will contribute richness
of vocabulary for the vocabulary of the tragedians
is full of dignity, while in that of the comedians
there is a certain elegance and Attic grace. They
are, too, more careful about dramatic structure than
the majority of moderns, who regard epigram as the
sole merit of every kind of literary work. For
purity at any rate and manliness, if I may say so,
we must certainly go to these writers, since to-day
even our style of speaking is infected with all the
faults of modern decadence. Finally we may derive
confidence from the practice of the greatest orators
of drawing upon the early poets to support their
arguments or adorn their eloquence. For we find,
more especially in the pages of Cicero, but frequently in Asinius and other orators of that period, quotations from Ennius, Accius, Pacuvius, Lucilius, Terence,
Caecilius and others, inserted not merely to show
the speaker's learning, but to please his hearers
as well, since the charms of poetry provide a pleasant relief from the severity of forensic eloquence. Such quotations have the additional advantage of
helping the speaker's case, for the orator makes use
of the sentiments expressed by the poet as evidence
in support of his own statements. But while my
earlier remarks have special application to the
education of boys, those which I have just made apply rather to persons of riper years; for the love of
letters and the value of reading are not confined to
one's schooldays, but end only with life. In lecturing the teacher of literature must give
attention to minor points as well he will ask his
class after analysing a verse to give him the parts of
speech and the peculiar features of the feet which
it contains these latter should be so familiar in
poetry as to make their presence desired even in
the prose of oratory. He will point out what words
are barbarous, what improperly used, and what are
contrary to the laws of language. He will not do
this by way of censuring the poets for such peculiarities, for poets are usually the servants of their
metres and are allowed such licence that faults
are given other names when they occur in poetry
for we style them metaplasms, schematisms and
schemata, as I have said, and make a virtue of
necessity. Their aim will rather be to familiarise the
pupil with the artifices of style and to stimulate his
memory. Further in the elementary stages of such
instruction it will not be unprofitable to show the
different meanings which may be given to each word.
With regard to glossemala, that is to say words not
in common use, the teacher must exercise no ordinary diligence, while still greater care is required in
teaching all the tropes which are employed for the
adornment more especially of poetry, but of oratory
as well, and in making his class acquainted with the
two sorts of schemata or figures known as figures of
speech and figures of thought. I shall however postpone discussion of tropes and figures till I come to
deal with the various ornaments of style. Above
all he will impress upon their minds the value of
proper arrangement, and of graceful treatment of
the matter in hand he will show what is appropriate
to the various characters, what is praiseworthy in the
thoughts or words, where copious diction is to be
commended and where restraint. In addition to this he will explain the various
stories that occur this must be done with care,
but should not be encumbered with superfluous
detail. For it is sufficient to set forth the version
which is generally received or at any rate rests upon
good authority. But to ferret out everything that
has ever been said on the subject even by the most
worthless of writers is a sign of tiresome pedantry
or empty ostentation, and results in delaying and
swamping the mind when it would be better
employed on other themes. The man who pores
over every page even though it be wholly unworthy
of reading, is capable of devoting his attention
to the investigation of old wives' tales. And yet
the commentaries of teachers of literature are full
of such encumbrances to learning and strangely
unfamiliar to their own authors. It is, for instance,
recorded that Didymus, who was unsurpassed for
the number of books which he wrote, on one occasion
objected to some story as being absurd, whereupon
one of his own books was produced which contained
the story in question. Such abuses occur chiefly in
connexion with fabulous stories and are sometimes
carried to ludicrous or even scandalous extremes
for in such cases the more unscrupulous commentator
has such full scope for invention, that he can tell lies to his heart's content about whole books and authors
without fear of detection for what never existed
can obviously never be found, whereas if the subject
is familiar the careful investigator will often detect
the fraud. Consequently I shall count it a merit in
a teacher of literature that there should be some
things which he does not know. IX. I have now finished with two of the
departments, with which teachers of literature profess to deal, namely the art of speaking correctly
and the interpretation of authors; the former they
call nethodic, the latter histori We must however
add to their activities instruction in certain rudiments
of oratory for the benefit of those who are not yet
ripe for the schools of rhetoric. Their pupils should
learn to paraphrase Aesop's fables, the natural successors of the fairy stories of the nursery, in simple
and restrained language and subsequently to set
down this paraphrase in writing with the same simplicity of style they should begin by analysing
each verse, then give its meaning in different
language, and finally proceed to a freer paraphrase in
which they will be permitted now to abridge and
now to embellish the original, so far as this may be
done without losing the poet's meaning. This is no
easy task even for the expert instructor, and the
pupil who handles it successfully will be capable of
learning everything. He should also be set to write
aphorisms, moral essays chriae and delineations of character ethologiae, of which the teacher will first give
the general scheme, since such themes will be drawn
from their reading. In all of these exercises the
general idea is the same, but the form differs
aphorisms are general propositions, while ethologiae are concerned with persons . Of moral essays there
are various forms some are akin to aphorisms and
commence with a simple statement or  others give the answer to a question
and begin or while a third and not dissimilar type
begins, Some hold that a moral essay may take some action
as its text; take for example the statement or
a very similar example which they do not venture
actually to propose as a theme for a moral essay, but
content themselves with saying that it is of the
nature of such a theme, namely All
these instances are couched in the same grammatical form and deeds no less than sayings may
be presented for treatment. Short stories from the
poets should in my opinion be handled not with
a view to style but as a means of increasing knowledge. Other more serious and ambitious tasks
have been also imposed on teachers of literature by
the fact that Latin rhetoricians will have nothing to
do with them Greek rhetoricians have a better
comprehension of the extent and nature of the tasks
placed on their shoulders. 