There is one practice at present in vogue
for boys of the age under discussion, which ought
in my opinion undoubtedly to be changed. They
should not be forced to commit all their own compositions to memory and to deliver them on an
appointed day, as is at present the custom. This
practice is especially popular with the boys' fathers,
who think that their sons are not really studying
unless they declaim on every possible occasion,
although as a matter of fact progress depends mainly on industry. For though I strongly approve of boys writing compositions and would have
them spend as much time as possible over such
tasks, I had much rather that for the purpose of
learning by heart passages should be selected from
the orators or historians or any other works that
may be deserving of such attention. For it is a
better exercise for the memory to learn the words
of others than it is to learn one's own, and those
who have practised this far harder task will find
no difficulty in committing to memory their own
compositions with which they are already familiar.
Further they will form an intimate acquaintance
with the best writings, will carry their models
with them and unconsciously reproduce the style
of the speech which has been impressed upon the
memory. They will have a plentiful and choice
vocabulary and a command of artistic structure and
a supply of figures which will not have to be
hunted for, but will offer themselves spontaneously from the treasure-house, if I may so call it,
in which they are stored. In addition they will
be in the agreeable position of being able to
quote the happy sayings of the various authors, a
power which they will find most useful in the
courts. For phrases which have not been coined
merely to suit the circumstances of the lawsuit of
the moment carry greater weight and often win
greater praise than if they were our own. I
would however allow boys occasionally to declaim
their own compositions that they may reap the reward of their labours in the applause of a large
audience, that most coveted of all prizes. But this
should not be permitted until they have produced something more finished than usual they will thus
be rewarded for their industry and rejoice in the
thought that the privilege accorded them is the
recompense of merit. 