The age at which the orator should begin to
plead will of course depend on the development of
his strength. I shall not specify it further, since it
is clear that Demosthenes pleaded against his
guardians while he was still a mere boy, Calvus,
Caesar and Pollio all undertook cases of the first
importance before they were old enough to be
qualified for the quaestorship, others are said to have
pleaded while still wearing the garb of boyhood,
and Augustus Caesar delivered a funeral oration over
his grandmother from the public rostra when he was
only twelve years old. In my opinion we should aim at a happy mean. The unripe brow of boyhood
should not be prematurely robbed of its ingenuous
air nor should the young speaker's powers be brought
before the public while yet unformed, since such a
practice leads to a contempt for study, lays the
foundations of impudence and induces a fault which
is pernicious in all departments of life, namely, a self-confidence that is not justified by the speaker's
resources. On the other hand, it is undesirable to
postpone the apprenticeship of the bar till old age
for the fear of appearing in public grows daily and
the magnitude of the task on which we must venture
continually increases and we waste time deliberating
when we should begin, till we find it is too late to
begin at all. Consequently it is desirable that the
fruit of our studies should be brought before the
public eye while it is still fresh and sweet, while it
may hope for indulgence and be secure of a kindly
disposition in the audience, while boldness is not
unbecoming and youth compensates for all defects
and boyish extravagance is regarded as a sign of
natural vigour. Take for example the whole of the
well-known passage from Cicero's defence of Sextus
Roscius etc. This passage was delivered at the age of
twenty-six amid loud applause from the audience,
but in later years he acknowledges that the ferment
of youth has died down and his style been clarified
with age. And, indeed, however much private study
may contribute to success, there is still a peculiar
proficiency that the courts alone can give for there
the atmosphere is changed and the reality of the peril puts a different complexion on things, while, if
it is impossible to combine the two, practice without
theory is more useful than theory without practice.
Consequently, some who have grown old in the
schools lose their heads when confronted by the
novelty of the law courts and wish that it were
possible to reproduce all the conditions under which
they delivered their exercises. But there sits the
judge in silence, their opponent bellows at them, no
rash utterance passes unnoticed and all assumptions
must be proved, the clock cuts short the speech that
has been laboriously pieced together at the cost of
hours of study both by day and night, and there are
certain cases which require simplicity of language and
the abandonment of the perpetual bombast of the
schools, a fact which these fluent fellows completely
fail to realise. And so you will find some persons
who regard themselves as too eloquent to speak in
the courts. On the other hand, the man, whom we
conducted to the forum while still young and in the
charm of immaturity, should begin with as easy and
favourable a case as may be just as the cubs of wild
beasts are brought up to start with on softer
forms of prey, and should not proceed straight
from this commencement to plead case after case
without a break, or cause his talents to set and
harden while they still require nourishment; on the
contrary, as soon as he has come to realise the nature
of the conflicts in which he will have to engage and
the object to which his studies should be directed, he
should take an interval of rest and refreshment.
Thus, at an age to which boldness is still natural, he
will find it easy to get over the timidity which invariably accompanies the period of apprenticeship, and will not, on the other hand, carry his boldness so far
as to lead him to despise the difficulties of his task.
This was the method employed by Cicero for when
he had already won a distinguished position at the
bar of his day, he took ship to Asia and there studied
under a number of professors of philosophy and
rhetoric, but above all under Apollonius Molon,
whose lectures he had attended at Rome and to
whom he now at Rhodes entrusted the refashioning
and recasting of his style. It is only when theory
and practice are brought into a perfect harmony
that the orator reaps the reward of all his study. 