After employing these gifts of eloquence in
the courts, in councils, in public assemblies and the
debates of the senate, and, in a word, in the performance of all the duties of a good citizen, the
orator will bring his activities to a close in a manner
worthy of a blameless life spent in the pursuit of
the noblest of professions. And he will do this,
not because he can ever have enough of doing good, or because one endowed with intellect and talents
such as his would not be justified in praying that
such glorious labours may be prolonged to their
utmost span, but for this reason, that it is his duty
to look to the future, for fear that his work may be
less effective than it has been in the past. For the
orator depends not merely on his knowledge, which
increases with the years, but on his voice, lungs and
powers of endurance. And if these be broken or
impaired by age or health, he must beware that he
does not fall short in something of his high reputation as a master of oratory, that fatigue does not
interrupt his eloquence, that he is not brought to
realise that some of his words are inaudible, or to
mourn that he is not what once he was. Domitius
Afer was by far the greatest of all the orators whom
it has been my good fortune to know, and I saw
him, when far advanced in years, daily losing something of that authority which his merits had won
for him; he whose supremacy in the courts had once
been universally acknowledged, now pleaded amid
the unworthy laughter of some, and the silent
blushes of others, giving occasion to the malicious
saying that he had rather And
yet even then, whatever his deficiencies, he spoke
not badly, but merely less well. Therefore before ever he fall a prey to the ambush
where time lies in wait for him, the orator should
sound the retreat and seek harbour while his ship
is yet intact. For the fruits of his studies will
not be lessened by retirement. Either he will bequeath the history of his own times for the delight
of after ages, or will interpret the law to those
who seek his counsels, as Lucius Crassus proposes to do in the de Oratore of Cicero, or compose some
treatise on the art of oratory, or give worthy utterance
to the sublimest ideals of conduct. His house
will, as in the days of old, be thronged by all
the best of the rising generation, who will seek to
learn from him as from an oracle how they may find
the path to true eloquence. And he as their father
in the art will mould them to all excellence, and
like some old pilot will teach them of the shores
whereby their ships must sail, of the harbours where
they may shelter, and the signs of the weather, and
will expound to them what they shall do when the
breeze is fair or the tempest blows. Whereto he
will be inclined not only by the common duty of
humanity, but by a certain passion for the task that
once was his, since no man desires that the art
wherein he was once supreme should suffer decay
or diminution. And what can be more honourable
than to teach that which you know surpassing well
It was for this that the elder Caelius brought his son
to Cicero, as the latter tells us, and it was with this
intent that the same great orator took upon himself
the duties of instructor, and trained Pansa, Hirtius
and Dolabella by declaiming daily before them or
hearing them declaim. And I know not whether
we should not deem it the happiest moment in an
orator's life, when he has retired from the public
gaze, the consecrated priest of eloquence, free from
envy and far from strife, when he has set his glory
on a pinnacle beyond the reach of detraction, enjoys,
while still living, that veneration which most men
win but after death, and sees how great shall be his
renown amid generations yet unborn. I can say with a good conscience that, as far as my poor powers have permitted, I have published
frankly and disinterestedly, for the benefit of such
as might wish to learn, all that my previous knowledge and the researches made for the purpose of
this work might supply. And to have taught what
lie knows is satisfaction enough for any good man.
I fear, however, that I may be regarded as setting
too lofty an ideal for the orator by insisting that he
should be a good man skilled in speaking, or as
imposing too many subjects of study on the learner.
For in addition to the many branches of knowledge
which have to be studied in boyhood and the traditional rules of eloquence, I have enjoined the study
of morals and of civil law, so that I am afraid that
even those who have regarded these things as
essential to my theme, may he appalled at the delay
which they impose and abandon all hope of achievement before they have put my precepts to the test.
I would ask them to consider how great are the
powers of the mind of man and how astonishing its
capacity for carrying its desires into execution for
has not man succeeded in crossing the high seas, in
learning the number and the courses of the stars,
and almost measuring the universe itself, all of them
accomplishments of less importance than oratory, but
of far greater difficulty And then let them reflect
on the greatness of' their aims and on the fact that
no labour should be too huge for those that are
beckoned by the hope of such reward. If they can
only rise to the height of this conception, they will
find it easier to enter on this portion of their task,
and will cease to regard the road as impassable or
even hard. For the first and greatest of' the aims
we set before us, namely that we shall be good men, depends for its achievement mainly on the
will to succeed and he that truly and sincerely
forms such resolve, will easily acquire those forms
of knowledge that teach the way to virtue. For
the precepts that are enjoined upon us are not
so complex or so numerous that they may be
acquired by little more than a few years' study. It
is repugnance to learn that makes such labour long.
For if you will only believe it, you will quickly learn
the principles that shall lead you to a life of virtue
and happiness. For nature brought us into the world
that we might attain to all excellence of mind, and
so easy is it for those to learn who seek for better
things, that he who directs his gaze aright will
rather marvel that the bad should be so many. For
as water is the natural element of fish, dry land
for creatures of the earth and the circumambient
atmosphere for winged things, even so it should
be easier to live according to nature than counter
to her will. As regards other accomplishments,
there are plenty of years available for their acquisition, even though we measure the life of man not
by the span of age, but by the period of youth. For
in every case order and method and a sense of proportion will shorten our labour. But the chief fault
lies with our teachers, in that they love to keep back
the pupils they have managed to lay their hands on,
partly from the desire to draw their miserable fees
for as long as possible, partly out of ostentation, to
enhance the difficulty of acquiring the knowledge
which they promise to impart, and to some extent
owing to their ignorance or carelessness in teaching.
The next most serious fault lies in ourselves, who
think it better to linger over what we have learned than to learn what we do not yet know. For example, to restrict my remarks mainly to the study
of rhetoric, what is the use of spending so many
years, after the fashion now so prevalent for I will
say nothing of those who spend almost their whole
lives, in declaiming in the schools and devoting so
much labour to the treatment of fictitious themes,
when it would be possible with but slight expenditure
of time to form some idea of what the true conflicts
are in which the orator must engage, and of the
laws of speaking which he ought to follow In
saying this, I do not for a moment mean to suggest
that we should ever omit to exercise ourselves in
speaking. I merely urge that we should not grow old
over one special form of exercise. We have been in a
position to acquire varied knowledge, to familiarise
ourselves with the principles that should guide our
life, and to try our strength in the courts, while we
were still attending the schools. The theory of speaking is of such a nature that it does not demand
many years for its acquisition. For any one of the
various branches of knowledge which I have mentioned will, as a rule, be found to be comprised in
a few volumes, a fact which shows that instruction
does not require an indefinite amount of time to be
devoted to it. The rest depends entirely on practice,
which at once develops our powers and maintains
them, once developed. Knowledge increases day
by day, and yet how many books is it absolutely
necessary to read in our search for its attainment, for
examples of facts from the historians or of eloquence
from the orators, or, again, for the opinions of the
philosophers and the lawyers, that is to say, if we
are content to read merely what is useful without attempting the impossible task of reading everything But it is ourselves that make the time for
study short for how little time we allot to it
Some hours are passed in the futile labour of ceremonial calls, others in idle chatter, others in staring
at the shows of the theatre, and others again in
feasting. To this add all the various forms of amusement, the insane attention devoted to the cultivation
of the body, journeys abroad, visits to the country,
anxious calculation of loss and gain, the allurements
of lust, wine-bibbing and those remaining hours
which are all too few to gratify our souls on fire
with passion for every kind of pleasure. If all this
time were spent on study, life would seem long
enough and there would be plenty of time for learning, even though we should take the hours of daylight only into our account, without asking any
assistance from the night, of which no little space
is superfluous even for the heaviest sleeper. As it
is, we count not the years which we have given to
study, but the years we have lived. And indeed
even although geometricians, musicians and grammarians, together with the professors of every other
branch of knowledge, spend all their lives, however
long, in the study of one single science, it does not
therefore follow that we require several lives more
if we are to learn more. For they do not spend all
their days even to old age in learning these things,
but being content to have learned these things and
nothing more, exhaust their length of years not in
acquiring, but in imparting knowledge. However, to say nothing of Homer, in whom we
may find either the perfect achievements, or at
any rate clear signs of the knowledge of every art, and to pass by Hippias of Elis, who not merely
boasted his knowledge of the liberal arts, but wore
a robe, a ring and shoes, all of which he had made
with his own hands, and had trained himself to be
independent of external assistance, we accept the
universal tradition of Greece to the effect that
Gorgias, triumphant over all the countless ills incident to extreme old age, would bid his hearers
propound any questions they pleased for him to
answer. Again in what branch of knowledge
worthy of literary expression was Plato deficient
How many generations' study did Aristotle require to embrace not merely the whole range of
philosophical and rhetorical knowledge, but to
investigate the nature of every beast and plant.
And yet they had to discover all these things which
we only have to learn. Antiquity has given us all
these teachers and all these patterns for our imitation,
that there might be no greater happiness conceivable
than to be born in this age above all others, since
all previous ages have toiled that we might reap the
fruit of their wisdom. Marcus Cato was at once a
great general, a philosopher, orator, historian, and
an expert both in law and agriculture, and despite
his military labours abroad and the distractions of
political struggles at home, and despite the rudeness
of the age in which he lived, he none the less
learned Greek, when far advanced in years, that he
might prove to mankind that even old men are
capable of learning that on which they have set
their hearts. How wide, almost universal, was the
knowledge that Varro communicated to the world
What of all that goes to make up the equipment of
an orator was lacking to Cicero Why should I say more, since even Cornelius Celsus, a man of very
ordinary ability, not merely wrote about rhetoric in
all its departments, but left treatises on the art of
war, agriculture and medicine as well. Indeed the
high ambition revealed by his design gives him the
right to ask us to believe that he was acquainted
with all these subjects. But, it will be urged, to carry out such a task is
difficult and has never been accomplished. To
which I reply that sufficient encouragement for
study may be found in the fact, firstly, that nature
does not forbid such achievement and it does not
follow that, because a thing never has been done, it
therefore never can be done, and secondly, that all
great achievements have required time for their first
accomplishment. Poetry has risen to the heights
of glory, thanks to the efforts of poets so far apart
as Homer and Virgil, and oratory owes its position
to the genius of Demosthenes and Cicero. Finally,
whatever is best in its own sphere must at some
previous time have been non-existent. But even if
a man despair of reaching supreme excellence and
why should he despair, if he have talents, health,
capacity and teachers to aid him, it is none the
less a fine achievement, as Cicero says, to win the
rank of second or even third. For even if a soldier
cannot achieve the glory of Achilles in war, he will
not despise fame such as fell to the lot of Ajax and
Diomede, while those who cannot be Homers may
be content to reach the level of Tyrtaeus. Nay, if
men had been obsessed by the conviction that it was
impossible to surpass the man who had so far shown
himself best, those whom we now regard as best
would never have reached such distinction, Lucretius and Macer would never have been succeeded by
Virgil, nor Crassus and Hortensius by Cicero, nor
they in their turn by those who flourished after
them. But even though we cannot hope to surpass
the great, it is still a high honour to follow in their
footsteps. Did Pollio and Messala, who began to
plead when Cicero held the citadel of eloquence,
fail to obtain sufficient honour in their lifetime or
to hand down a fair name to posterity The arts
which have been developed to the highest pitch
of excellence would deserve but ill of mankind if
that which was best had also been the last of its
line. Add to this the further consideration that
even moderate eloquence is often productive of
great results and, if such studies are to be measured
solely by their utility, is almost equal to the perfect
eloquence for which we seek. Nor would it be difficult
to produce either ancient or recent examples to show
that there is no other source from which men have
reaped such a harvest of wealth, honour, friendship
and glory, both present and to come. But it would
be a disgrace to learning to follow the fashion of those
who say that they pursue not virtue, but only the
pleasure derived from virtue, and to demand this
meaner recompense from the noblest of all arts, whose
practice and even whose possession is ample reward
for all our labours. Wherefore let us seek with all
our hearts that true majesty of oratory, the fairest
gift of god to man, without which all things are
stricken dumb and robbed alike of present glory and
the immortal record of posterity; and let us press
forward to whatsoever is best, since, if we do this,
we shall either reach the summit or at least see
many others far beneath us. Such, Marcellus Victorius, were the views by
the expression of which it seemed to me that I
might, as far as in me lay, help to advance the
teaching of oratory. If the knowledge of these
principles proves to be of small practical utility to
the young student, it should at least produce what
value more,the will to do well. div1