I have now, my dear Marcellus Victorius, completed the third book of the work which I have
dedicated to you, and have nearly finished a quarter
of my task, and am confronted with a motive for
renewed diligence and increased anxiety as to the
judgment it may be found to deserve. For up to
this point we were merely discussing rhetoric
between ourselves and, in the event of our system
being regarded as inadequate by the world at large,
were prepared to content ourselves with putting it
into practice at home and to confine ourselves to the
education of your son and mine. But now Domitianus Augustus has entrusted me with the education
of his sister's grandsons, and I should be undeserving of the honour conferred upon me by such
divine appreciation, if I were not to regard this
distinction as the standard by which the greatness
of my undertaking must be judged. For it is
clearly my duty to spare no pains in moulding
the character of my august pupils, that they may
earn the deserved approval of the most righteous
of censors. The same applies to their intellectual training, for I would not be found to have disappointed the expectations of a prince pre-eminent
in eloquence as in all other virtues. But no one
is surprised at the frequency with which the
greatest poets invoke the Muses not merely at the
commencement of their works, but even further
on when they have reached some important passage
and repeat their vows and utter fresh prayers for
assistance. Assuredly therefore I may ask indulgence
for doing what I omitted to do when I first entered
on this task and calling to my aid all the gods and
Himself before them all for his power is unsurpassed and there is no deity that looks with such
favour upon learning, beseeching him to inspire me
with genius in proportion to the hopes that he has
raised in me, to lend me propitious and ready aid and
make me even such as he has believed me to be.
And this, though the greatest, is not the only
motive for this act of religious devotion, but my work is
of such a nature that, as it proceeds, I am confronted
with greater and more arduous obstacles than have
yet faced me. For my next task is to explain the
order to be followed in forensic causes, which
present the utmost complication and variety. I must
set forth the function of the exordium, the method
of the statement of facts, the cogency of proofs, whether
we are confirming our own assertions or refuting
those of our opponents, and the force of theperoration,
whether we have to refresh the memory of the
judge by a brief recapitulation of the facts, or to do
what is far more effective, stir his emotions. Some
have preferred to give each of these points separate
treatment, fearing that if they undertook them as
a whole the burden would be greater than they could bear, and consequently have published several
books on each individual point. I have ventured
to treat them altogether and foresee such infinite
labour that I feel weary at the very thought of the
task I have undertaken. But I have set my hand to
the plough and must not look back. My strength
may fail me, but my courage must not fail. 1. The commencement or exorditum as we call it in
Latin is styled a proem by the Greeks. This seems
to me a more appropriate name, because whereas we
merely indicate that we are beginning our task, they
clearly show that this portion is designed as an introduction to the subject on which the orator has to
speak. It may be because means a tune, and
players on the lyre have given the name of proem to
the prelude which they perform to win the favour of
the audience before entering upon the regular contest
for the prize, that orators before beginning to plead
make a few introductory remarks to win the indulgence of the judges. Or it may be because in Greek means a way, that the practice has arisen of
calling an introduction a proem. But in any case
there can be no doubt that by proem we mean the
portion of a speech addressed to the judge before he
has begun to consider the actual case. And it is a
mistaken practice which we adopt in the schools of
always assuming in our exordia that the judge is
already acquainted with the case. This form of
licence arises from the fact that a sketch of the case
is always given before actual declamation. Such
kinds of exordia may, however, be employed in the courts, when a case comes on for the second time, but
never or rarely on the first occasion, unless we are
speaking before a judge who has knowledge of
the case from some other source. The sole purpose of the exordium is to prepare our
audience in such a way that they will be disposed to
lend a ready ear to the rest of our speech. The
majority of authors agree that this is best effected in
three ways, by making the audience well-disposed,
attentive and ready to receive instruction. I need
hardly say that these aims have to be kept in
view throughout the whole speech, but they are especially necessary at the commencement, when we
gain admission to the mind of the judge in order
to penetrate still further. As regards good-will, we secure that either from
persons connected with the case or from the case
itself. Most writers have divided these persons into
three classes, the plaintiff, the defendant and the
judge. This classification is wrong, for the exordium
may sometimes derive its conciliatory force from the
person of the pleader. For although he may be
modest and say little about himself, yet if he is
believed to be a good man, this consideration will
exercise the strongest influence at every point of
the case. For thus he will have the good fortune to
give the impression not so much that he is a
zealous advocate as that he is an absolutely reliable
witness. It is therefore pre-eminently desirable
that he should be believed to have undertaken
the case out of a sense of duty to a friend or
relative, or even better, if the point can be made,
by a sense of patriotism or at any rate some serious
moral consideration. No doubt it is even more necessary for the parties themselves to create the
impression that they have been forced to take legal
action by some weighty and honourable reason or even
by necessity. But just as the authority of the speaker
carries greatest weight, if his undertaking of the case
is free from all suspicion of meanness, personal spite
or ambition, so also we shall derive some silent support
from representing that we are weak, unprepared, and
no match for the powerful talents arrayed against us,
a frequent trick in the exordia of Messala. For
men have a natural prejudice in favour of those
who are struggling against difficulties, and a scrupulous judge is always specially ready to listen to an
advocate whom he does not suspect to have designs
on his integrity. Hence arose the tendency of
ancient orators to pretend to conceal their eloquence,
a practice exceedingly unlike the ostentation of our
own times. It is also important to avoid giving the
impression that we are abusive, malignant, proud
or slanderous toward any individual or body of
men, especially such as cannot be hurt without
exciting the disapproval of the judges. As to the
judge, it would be folly for me to warn speakers
not to say or even hint anything against him, but
for the fact that such things do occur. Our opponent's advocate will sometimes provide us with
material for our exordium we may speak of him
in honorific terms, pretending to fear his eloquence
and influence with a view to rendering them suspect
to the judge, or occasionally, though very seldom, we
may abuse him, as Asinius did in his speech on behalf
of the heirs of Urbinia, where he includes among the
proofs of the weakness of the plaintiff's case the fact
that he has secured Labienus as his advocate. Cornelius Celsus denies that such remarks can be
considered as belonging to the exordium on the
ground that they are irrelevant to the actual case.
Personally I prefer to follow the authority of the
greatest orators, and hold that whatever concerns the
pleader is relevant to the case, since it is natural that
the judges should give readier credence to those to
whom they find it a pleasure to listen. The character
of our client himself may, too, be treated in various
ways we may emphasise his worth or we may
commend his weakness to the protection of the
court. Sometimes it is desirable to set forth his
merits, when the speaker will be less hampered by
modesty than if he were praising his own. Sex, age
and situation are also important considerations, as for
instance when women, old men or wards are pleading
in the character of wives, parents or children.
For pity alone may move even a strict judge.
These points, however, should only be lightly touched
upon in the exordium, not run to death. As regards
our opponent he is generally attacked on similar
lines, but with the method reversed. For power is
generally attended by envy, abject meanness by
contempt, guilt and baseness by hatred, three
emotions which are powerful factors to alienate the
good-will of the judges. But a simple statement will
not suffice, for even the uneducated are capable of
that most of the points will require exaggeration
or extenuation as expediency may demand the
method of treatment belongs to the orator, the
points themselves belong to the case. We shall win the good-will of the judge not
merely by praising him, which must be done with
tact and is an artifice common to both parties, but by linking his praise to the furtherance of our own
case. For instance, in pleading for a man of good
birth we shall appeal to his own high rank, in speaking
for the lowly we shall lay stress on his sense of justice, on his pity in pleading the cause of misfortune,
and on his severity when we champion the victims
of wrong, and so on. I should also wish, if possible,
to be acquainted with the character of the judge.
For it will be desirable to enlist their temperaments
in the service of our cause, where they are such as
are like to be useful, or to mollify them, if they are
like to prove adverse, just according as they are
harsh, gentle, cheerful, grave, stern, or easy-going.
It will, however, sometimes happen that the judge
is hostile to us and friendly to our adversaries. Such
cases demand the attention of both parties and I am
not sure that the party favoured by the judge does
not require to handle the situation with even more
care than his opponent. For perverse judges have
sometimes a preposterous tendency to give judgment against their friends or in favour of those with
whom they have a quarrel, and of committing injustice merely to avoid the appearance of partiality.
Again some have been judges in cases where their
own interests were involved. I note, for instance,
in the books of observations published by Septimius
that Cicero appeared in such a case, while I myself,
when I appeared on behalf of Queen Berenice,
actually pleaded before her. In such cases we must
be guided by the same principles that I have laid
down above. The opponent of the judge will
emphasise his confidence in the justice of his client's
cause, while the advocate of his interests will
express the fear that the judge may be influenced by a quixotic delicacy. Further, if the judge is
thought to have come into court with a prejudice
in favour of one side, we must try to remove or
strengthen that prejudice as circumstances may
demand. Again occasionally we shall have to calm
the judges' fears, as Cicero does in the pro Milone,
where he strives to persuade them not to think that
Pompey's soldiers have been stationed in the court
as a threat to themselves. Or it may be necessary
to frighten them, as Cicero does in the Verrines.
There are two ways of bringing fear to bear upon
the judges. The commonest and most popular is to
threaten them with the displeasure of the Roman
people or the transference of the juries to another
class; the second is somewhat brutal and is rarely
employed, and consists in threatening them with a
prosecution for bribery this is a method which is
fairly safe with a large body of judges, since it
checks the bad and pleases the good members of
the jury, but I should never recommend its employment with a single judge except in the very last
resort. But if necessity should drive us to such a
course, we must remember that such threats do not
come under the art of oratory, any more than appeals
from the judgment of the court though that is often
useful, or the indictment of the judge before he
gives his decision. For even one who is no orator
can threaten or lay an information. If the case affords us the means of winning the
favour of the judge, it is important that the points
which seem most likely to serve to our purpose
should be selected for introduction into the exordium. On this subject Verginius falls into error, for he
asserts that Theodorus lays down that some one
reflexion on each individual question that is involved
by the case should be introduced into the exordium.
As a matter of fact Theodorus does not say this,
but merely that the judge should be prepared for
the most important of the questions that are to be
raised. There is nothing to object to in this rule,
save that he would make it of universal application,
whereas it is not possible with every question nor
desirable in every case. For instance, seeing that
the plaintiff's advocate speaks first, and that
till he has spoken the judge is ignorant of the
nature of the dispute, how is it possible for us to
introduce reflexions relating to all the questions
involved The facts of the case must be stated
before that can be done. We may grant that some
questions may be mentioned, for that will sometimes
be absolutely necessary; but can we introduce all
the most important questions, or in other words the
whole case If we do we shall have completed our
statement of facts within the limits of the exordium.
Again if, as often happens, the case is somewhat
difficult, surely we should seek to win the good-will
of the judge by other portions of our speech sooner
than thrust the main questions upon him in all their
naked harshness before we have done anything to
secure his favour. If the main questions ought
always to be treated at the beginning of a speech,
we might dispense with the exordium. We shall
then occasionally introduce certain points from the
main questions into the exordium, which will exercise
a valuable influence in winning the judge to regard
us with favour. It is not necessary to enumerate the points which are likely to gain us such favour,
because they will be obvious as soon as we have
acquainted ourselves with the circumstances of each
dispute, while in view of the infinite variety presented by cases it is out of the question to specify
them here. Just, however, as it is in the interest
of our case to note and amplify these points, so it is
also to rebut or at any rate lessen the force of
anything that is damaging to our case. Again
our case may justify an appeal to compassion with
regard to what we have suffered in the past or are
likely to suffer. For I do not share the opinion
held by some, that the exordium and the peroration
are to be distinguished by the fact that the latter
deals with the past, the former with the future.
Rather I hold that the difference between them is
this in our opening any preliminary appeal to the
compassion of the judge must be made sparingly
and with restraint, while in the peroration we may
give full rein to our emotions, place fictitious
speeches in the mouths of our characters, call the
dead to life, and produce the wife or children of the
accused in court, practices which are less usual in
exordia. But it is the function of the exordium not
merely to excite the feelings to which I have alluded,
but to do all that is possible to show that our
opponent's case is not deserving of them. It is
advantageous to create the impression not merely
that our fate will be deserving of pity, if we lose, but
that our adversary will be swollen with outrageous
insolence if he prove successful. But exordia are often drawn from matters which
do not, strictly speaking, concern either cases or the
persons involved, though not unrelated to either. In such relation to persons stand not only wives
and children of whom I have just spoken, but also
relations, friends, and at times districts and states
together with anything else that is like to suffer
injury from the fall of the client whom we defend.
As regards external circumstances which have a
bearing on the case, I may mention time, which
is introduced in the exordium of the pro Caelio,
place in the pro Deiotaro,the appearance of the
court in the pro Milone,public opinion in the
Verrines,and finally, as I cannot mention all,
the ill-repute of the law courts and the popular
expectation excited by the case. None of these
actually belong to the case, but all have some
bearing on it. Theophrastus adds that the exordium
may be drawn from the speech of one's opponent,
as that of the pro Ctesiphonte of Demosthenes appears
to be, where he asks that he may be allowed to
speak as he pleases and not to be restricted to the
form laid down by the accuser in his speech. Confidence often labours under the disadvantage
of being regarded as arrogance. But there are
certain tricks for acquiring good-will, which though
almost universal, are by no means to be neglected, if
only to prevent their being first employed against
ourselves. I refer to rhetorical expressions of wishing, detestation, entreaty, or anxiety. For it keeps
the judge's attention on the alert, if he is led to
think the case novel, important, scandalous, or
likely to set a precedent, still more if he is excited
by concern for himself or the common weal, when his mind must be stirred by hope, fear, admonition,
entreaty and even by falsehood, if it seems to us
that it is likely to advance our case. We shall also
find it a useful device for wakening the attention of
our audience to create the impression that we shall
not keep them long and intend to stick closely to
the point. The mere fact of such attention undoubtedly makes the judge ready to receive instruction from us, but we shall contribute still more to
this effect if we give a brief and lucid summary of
the case which he has to try; in so doing we shall
be following the method adopted by Homer and
Virgil at the beginning of their poems. For as regards
the length of the exordium, it should propound rather
than expound, and should not describe how each
thing occurred, but simply indicate the points on
which the orator proposes to speak. I do not think
a better example of this can be found than the
exordium to the pro Cluentio of Cicero. All this, however, is easier for the defender
than the prosecutor, since the latter has merely to remind the judge, while the former has to instruct him.
Nor shall any authority, however great, induce me
to abandon my opinion that it is always desirable to
render the judge attentive and ready to receive instruction. I am well aware that those who disagree with me urge that it is to the advantage of a
bad case that its nature should not be understood;
but such lack of understanding arises not from
inattention on the part of the judge, but from his
being deceived. Our opponent has spoken and
perhaps convinced him; we must alter his opinion,
and this we cannot do unless we render him attentive
to what we have to say and ready to be instructed.
What are we to do then I agree to the view that
we should cut down, depreciate and deride some of
our opponent's arguments with a view to lessening
the attention shown him by the judge, as Cicero did
in the pro Ligario. For what was the purpose of
Cicero's irony save that Caesar should be induced to
regard the case as presenting only old familiar
features and consequently to give it less attention
What was his purpose in the pro Caelio save to
make the case seem far more trivial than had been
anticipated It is, however, obvious that of the rules which I
have laid down, some will be applicable to one case
and some to another. The majority of writers
consider that there are five kinds of causes, the
honourable, the mean, the doubtful or ambiguous, the
extraordinary and the obscure, or as they are called in
Greek, and To these some would add a sixth,
the scandalous, which some again include under the
heading of the mean, others under the extraordinary.
The latter name is given to cases which are contrary
to ordinary expectation. In ambiguous cases it is
specially important to secure the good-will of the
judge, in the obscure to render him ready to receive instruction, in the mean to excite his attention. As
regards the honourable the very nature of the case is
sufficient to win the approval of the judge; in the
scandalous and extraordinary some kind of palliation
is required. Some therefore divide the exordium into two parts,
the introduction and the insinuation, making the former
contain a direct appeal to the good-will and attention
of the judge. But as this is impossible in scandalous
cases, they would have the orator on such occasions insinuate himself little by little into the minds of his
judges, especially when the features of the case which
meet the eye are discreditable, or because the subject
is disgraceful or such as to meet with popular disapproval, or again if the outward circumstances of the
case are such as to handicap it or excite odium as for
instance when a patron appears against a client or a
father against a son, or pity as when our opponent
is an old or blind man or a child. To save the situation the rhetoricians lay down a number of rules at
quite inordinate length they invent fictitious cases
and treat them realistically on the lines which would
be followed in actual pleading. But these peculiar
circumstances arise from such a variety of causes as
to render classification by species impossible, and
their enumeration save under the most general heads
would be interminable. The line to be adopted will
therefore depend on the individual nature of each
case. As a general principle, however, I should
advise the avoidance of points which tell against us
and concentrate on those which are likely to be of
service. If the case itself is weak, we may derive
help from the character of our client; if his character
is doubtful, we may find salvation in the nature of the case. If both are hopeless, we must look out for
something that will damage our opponent. For
though it is desirable to secure as much positive
good-will as possible, the next best thing is to incur
the minimum of actual dislike. Where we cannot
deny the truth of facts that are urged against us, we
must try to show that their significance has been
exaggerated or that the purpose of the act was not
what is alleged or that the facts are irrelevant or
that what was done may be atoned for by penitence
or has already been sufficiently punished. It is
consequently easier for an advocate to put forward
such pleas than for his client, since the former can
praise without laying himself open to the charge of
arrogance and may sometimes even reprove him with
advantage to the case. At times, like Cicero in his
defence of Rabirius Postumus, he will pretend that
he himself is strongly moved, in order to win the
ear of the judge and to give the impression of
one who is absolutely convinced of the truth of his
cause, that so his statements may find all the readier
credence whether he defends or denies the actions
attributed to his client. Consequently it is of the first
importance, wherever the alternative is open to us,
to consider whether we are to adopt the character of
a party to the suit or of an advocate. In the schools,
of course, we have a free choice in the matter, but it
is only on rare occasions that a man is capable of
pleading his own case in the actual courts. When
we are going to deliver a declamation on a theme
that turns largely on its emotional features, we
must give it a dramatic character suited to the
persons concerned. For emotions are not transferable at will, nor can we give the same forcible expression to another man's emotions that we should
give to our own. The circumstances which call for
insinuation arise also in cases where the pleading of
our opponent has made a powerful impression on the
minds of the judges, or where the audience whom
we have to address are tired. The first difficulty we
shall evade by promising to produce our own proofs
and by eluding the arguments of our opponents, the
second by holding out hopes that we shall be brief
and by the methods already mentioned for capturing
the attention of the judges. Again an opportune
display of wit will often restore their flagging spirits
and we may alleviate their boredom by the introduction of entertaining matter derived from any source
that may be available. It will also be found advantageous to anticipate the objections that may be
raised by our opponent, as Cicero does when he
says he then goes on to show
that the accusation which he has undertaken is
really a defence of the allies, an artifice known as or anticipation. Although this is at times
a useful device, some of our declaimers employ it
on practically every occasion, on the assumption
that one should always start with the order thus
reversed. The adherents of Apollodorus reject the view
stated above to the effect that there are only three
respects in which the mind of the judge requires to
be prepared, and enumerate many others, relating to
the character of the judge, to opinions regarding
matters which though outside the case have still some bearing on it, to the opinion current as to the
case itself, and so on ad infinitum to these they add
others relating to the elements of which every
dispute is composed, such as persons, deeds, words,
motives, time and place, occasions and the like.
Such views are, I admit, perfectly correct, but are
covered by one or other of the three classes which I
have mentioned. For if I can secure good-will,
attention and readiness to learn on the part of my
judge, I cannot see what else I ought to require;
even fear, which perhaps may be thought more than
anything else to lie outside the considerations I have
mentioned, secures the attention of the judge and
deters him from favouring our opponent. It is not, however, sufficient to explain the nature
of the exordium to our pupils. We must also indicate
the easiest method of composing an exordium. I
would therefore add that he who has a speech to
make should consider what he has to say; before
whom, in whose defence, against whom, at what
time and place, under what circumstances he has to
speak; what is the popular opinion on the subject,
and what the prepossessions of the judge are likely
to be; and finally of what we should express our
deprecation or desire. Nature herself will give him
the knowledge of what he ought to say first. Nowadays, however, speakers think that anything with
which they choose to start is a proem and that
whatever occurs to them, especially if it be a reflexion
that catches their fancy, is an exordium. There are,
no doubt, many points that can be introduced into an
exordium which are common to other parts of a speech,
but the best test of the appropriateness of a point to
any part of a speech is to consider whether it would lose effect by being placed elsewhere. A most attractive form of exordium is that which draws its material
from the speech of our opponent, if only for the
reason that the fact of its not having been composed
at home, but having been improvised on the spot to
meet the needs of the case increases the orator's
reputation for natural talent by the readiness with
which it is produced and carries conviction owing to
the simple and ordinary language in which it is
clothed. As a result, even although the rest of the
speech has been committed to writing and carefully
elaborated, the whole of the speech will often be
regarded as extempore, simply because its commencement is clearly not the result of previous
study. Indeed a certain simplicity in the thoughts,
style, voice and look of the speaker will often
produce so pleasing an effect in the exordium that
even in a case where there is no room for doubt the
confidence of the speaker should not reveal itself too
openly. For as a rule the judge dislikes self-confidence in a pleader, and conscious of his rights
tacitly demands the respectful deference of the
orator. No less care must be taken to avoid exciting
any suspicion in this portion of our speech, and we
should therefore give no hint of elaboration in the
exordium, since any art that the orator may employ
at this point seems to be directed solely at the
judge. But to avoid all display of art in itself
requires consummate art this admirable canon has
been insisted on by all writers, though its force has
been somewhat impaired by present conditions, since
in certain trials, more especially those brought on
capital charges or in the centumviral court, the
judges themselves demand the most finished and elaborate speeches, think themselves insulted, unless
the orator shows signs of having exercised the
utmost diligence in the preparation of his speech,
and desire not merely to be instructed, but to be
charmed. It is difficult to preserve the happy mean
in carrying this precept into effect but by a skilful
compromise it will be possible to give the impression
of speaking with care but without elaborate design.
The old rule still holds good that no unusual word,
no overbold metaphor, no phrase derived from the
lumber-rooms of antiquity or from poetic licence
should be detected in the exordium. For our position
is not yet established, the attention of the audience
is still fresh and imposes restraint upon us as soon
as we have won their good-will and kindled their
interest, they will tolerate such freedom, more
especially when we have reached topics whose
natural richness prevents any licence of expression
being noticed in the midst of the prevailing
splendour of the passage. The style of the exrordiumn
should not resemble that of our purple patches nor
that of the argumentative and narrative portions of
the speech, nor yet should it be prolix or continuously ornate it should rather seem simple and
unpremeditated, while neither our words nor our
looks should promise too much. For a method of
pleading which conceals its art and makes no vain
display, being as the Greeks say will
often be best adapted to insinuate its way into the
minds of our hearers. But in all this we must be
guided by the extent to which it is expedient to
impress the minds of the judges. There is no point in the whole speech where confusion of memory or loss of fluency has a worse effect, for a faulty exordium is like a face seamed with scars;
and he who runs his ship ashore while leaving port
is certainly the least efficient of pilots. The length
of the exordium will be determined by the case;
simple cases require a short introduction only,
longer exordia being best suited to cases which are
complicated, suspect or unpopular. As for those
who have laid it down as a law applying to all
exordia that they should not be more than four
sentences long, they are merely absurd. On the
other hand undue length is equally to be avoided,
lest the head should seem to have grown out of all
proportion to the body and the judge should be
wearied by that which ought to prepare him for
what is to follow. The figure which the Greeks
call apostrophe, by which is meant the diversion of
our words to address some person other than the
judge, is entirely banned by some rhetoricians as
far as the exordium is concerned, and for this they
have some reason, since it would certainly seem to
be more natural that we should specially address
ourselves to those whose favour we desire to win.
Occasionally however some striking expression of
thought is necessary in the exordium which can be
given greater point and vehemence if addressed to
some person other than the judge. In such a case
what law or what preposterous superstition is to
prevent us from adding force to such expression
of our thought by the use of this figure For the
writers of text-books do not forbid it because they
regard it as illicit, but because they think it useless.
Consequently if its utility be proved, we shall have
to employ it for the very reason for which we are
now forbidden to do so. Moreover Demosthenes turns to address Aeschines in his exordium, while
Cicero adopts the same device in several of his
speeches, but more especially in the pro Ligario,
where he turns to address Tubero. His speech
would have been much less effective, if any other
figure had been used, as will be all the more clearly
realised, if the whole of that most vigorous passage be altered so as to be addressed to the judge. For
it is a real and most unnatural diversion of the
passage, which destroys its whole force, if we say In the
original form Cicero attacks his opponent and
presses him hard, in the passage as altered he
would merely have pointed out a fact. The same
thing results if you alter the turn of the passage in
Demosthenes. Again did not Sallust when
speaking against Cicero himself address his exordium
to him and not to the judge In fact he actually
opens with the words wherein he followed the precedent set by Cicero
in his speech against Catiline where he opens with
the words Finally to remove all reason for
feeling surprise at the employment of apostrophe,
Cicero in his defence of Scaurus, on a charge of
bribery the speech is to be found in his Notebooks;
for he defended him twice actually introduces an
imaginary person speaking on behalf of the accused,
while in his pro Rahirio and his speech in defence
of this same Scaurus on a charge of extortion he employs illustrations, and in the pro Cluentio, as I
have already pointed out, introduces division into
heads. Still such artifices, although they may be
employed at times to good effect, are not to be
indulged in indiscriminately, but only when there is
strong reason for breaking the rule. The same remark
applies to simile which must however be brief,
metaphor and other tropes, all of which are forbidden
by our cautious and pedantic teachers of rhetoric, but
which we shall none the less occasionally employ,
unless indeed we are to disapprove of the magnificent
example of irony in the pro Ligario to which I have
already referred a few pages back. The rhetoricians
have however been nearer the truth in their censure
of certain other faults that may occur in the exordium.
The stock exordium which can be suited to a number
of different cases they style vulgar; it is an unpopular
form but can sometimes be effectively employed and
has often been adopted by some of the greatest orators.
The exordium which might equally well be used by
our opponent, they style common. That which our
opponent can turn to his own advantage, they call
interchangeable, that which is irrelevant to the case,
detached, and that which is drawn from some other
speech, transferred. In addition to these they
censure others as long and others as contrary to rule.
Most of these faults are however not peculiar to the
exordinum, but may be found in any or every portion
of a speech. Such are the rules for the exordium, wherever it
is employed. It may however sometimes be dispensed with. For occasionally it is superfluous, if
the judge has been sufficiently prepared for our
speech without it or if the case is such as to render such preparation unnecessary. Aristotle indeed
says that with good judges the exordium is entirely
unnecessary. Sometimes however it is impossible
to employ it, even if we desire to do so, when,
for instance, the judge is much occupied, when time
is short or superior authority forces us to embark
upon the subject right away. On the other hand
it is at times possible to give the force of an exordium
to other portions of the speech. For instance we
may ask the judges in the course of our statement of
the facts or of our arguments to give us their best
attention and good-will, a proceeding which Prodicus
recommended as a means of wakening them when
they begin to nod. A good example is the
following Further if the case involves a number of different
matters, each section must be prefaced with a short
introduction, such as or Even in the
proof there are many passages which perform the
same function as an exordium, such as the passage in
the pro Cluentio where Cicero introduces an attack
on the censors and in the pro Murena when he
apologises to Servius. But the practice is too
common to need illustration. However on all occasions when we have employed
the exordium, whether we intend to pass to the statement
of facts or direct to the proof, our intention should
be mentioned at the conclusion of the introduction,
with the result that the transition to what follows
will be smooth and easy. There is indeed a pedantic
and childish affectation in vogue in the schools of marking the transition by some epigram and seeking
to win applause by this feat of legerdemain. Ovid
is given to this form of affectation in his Metamorphoses, but there is some excuse for him owing to the
fact that he is compelled to weld together subjects
of the most diverse nature so as to form a continuous
whole. But what necessity is there for an orator to
gloss over his transitions or to attempt to deceive the
judge, who requires on the contrary to be warned to
give his attention to the sequence of the various
portions of the speech For instance the first part
of our statement of the facts will be wasted, if the
judge does not realise that we have reached that
stage. Therefore, although we should not be too
abrupt in passing to our statement of facts, it is best
to do nothing to conceal our transition. Indeed, if
the statement of fact on which we are about to embark
is somewhat long and complicated, we shall do well
to prepare the judge for it, as Cicero often does,
most notably in the following passage This is practically all that I can find
to say on the subject of the exordium. II. It is a most natural and frequently necessary
proceeding, that after preparing the mind of the
judge in the manner described above we should indicate the nature of the subject on which he will have
to give judgment that is the statement of facts. In
dealing with this question I shall deliberately pass
over the divisions made by certain writers, who make
too many classes and err on the side of subtlety. For they demand an explanation dealing not only with the
facts of the case which is before the court, but with the
person involved as in the sentence,  or of the
place where an incident occurred as in the sentence , or of the time at which something occurred as in the verse or of the causes of an occurrence, such as the
historians are so fond of setting forth, when they
explain the origin of a war, a rebellion or a pestilence.
Further they style some statements of fact 
and others a distinction which is self-evident. To this they add that our explanation may
refer to the past which is of course the commonest
form, the present for which compare Cicero's
remarks about the excitement caused among the
friends of Chrysogonus when his name was mentioned, or of the future a form permissible only to
prophets for hypotyposis or picturesque description
cannot be regarded as a statement of facts. However
let us pass to matters of more importance. The majority regard the statement of facts as being
indispensable but there are many considerations
which show that this view is erroneous. In the first
place there are some cases which are so brief, that
they require only a brief summary rather than a full
statement of the facts. This may apply to both
parties to a suit, as for instance in cases where there
is no necessity for explanation or where the facts are admitted and the whole question turns on a point of
law, as it so often does in the centumviral court, as
for example when we discuss, whether the heir of a
woman who has died intestate should be her son or
brother, or whether puberty is to be reckoned by age
or by physical development. The same situation
arises also in cases where the facts admit of full
statement, but are well known to the judge or have
been correctly set forth by a previous speaker.
Sometimes again the statement of facts can be
dispensed with only by one party, who is generally
the plaintiff, either because it is sufficient for him to
make a simple summary of his case or because it is
more expedient for him to do so. It may, for instance, suffice to say, or It is for the other party to
explain why these sums are not due to the plaintiff.
Again it is sometimes sufficient and expedient to
summarise a case in one sentence such as For the judge will
understand the whole charge from this simple
affirmation the sequence of events and the motive
for the deed will be matters for the defence to expound. On the other hand in some cases the
accused may dispense with the statement of facts,
when for instance the charge can neither be denied
nor palliated, but turns solely on some point of law
the following case will illustrate my meaning. A
man who has stolen from a temple money belonging
to a private individual is accused of sacrilege in
such a case a confession will be more seemly than
a full statement of facts While however I think that there are occasional
cases where the statement of facts may be dispensed
with, I disagree with those who say that there is no
statement of facts when the accused simply denies the
charge. This opinion is shared by Cornelius Celsus
who holds that most cases of murder and all of
bribery and extortion fall into this class. For he
thinks that the only statement of facts is that which
gives a general account of the charge before the
court. Yet he himself acknowledges that Cicero
employed the statement of facts in his defence of
Rabirius Postumus, in spite of the fact that Cicero
denies that any money came into the hands of
Rabirius and this was the question at issue and
gives no explanations relating to the actual charge in
his statement of facts. For my part I follow the very
highest authorities in holding that there are two
forms of statement of facts in forensic speeches, the
one expounding the facts of the case itself, the other
setting forth facts which have a bearing on the case.
I agree that a sentence such as does not amount to a statement of facts
but there will be a statement of facts, occasionally, too,
a long one, in answer to the arguments put forward
by the accuser it will deal with the past life of the
accused, with the causes which have brought an
innocent man into peril, and other circumstances
such as show the charge to be incredible. For the accuser does not merely say but
sets forth the facts proving his assertion tragedy will
provide an example, where Teucer accuses Ulysses
of murdering Ajax, and states that he was found in a
lonely place near the lifeless body of his enemy with
a blood-stained sword in his hands. To this Ulysses
does not merely reply that he did not do the deed,
but adds that he had no quarrel with Ajax, the
contest between them having been concerned solely
with the winning of renown he then goes on to
say how he came to be in the lonely place, how he
found Ajax lying lifeless and drew the sword from
the wound. Then follow arguments based on these
facts. But even when the accuser says and the accused says a statement of facts
is involved; for he must say where he was. Consequently cases of bribery and extortion will require
as many statements of this kind as there are
charges the charges themselves will be denied, but
it will be necessary to counter the arguments of the
accuser either singly or all together by setting forth
the facts in quite a different light. Is it, I ask you,
irrelevant for one accused of bribery to set forth
his parentage, his past life and the services on which
he relied for success in his candidature And if a
man is indicted for extortion, will it not be to his
advantage to set forth not merely his past record,
but also the reasons which have made the whole
province or the accuser or a witness hostile to
himself If these are not statements of facts, neither
is the first portion of Cicero's defence of Cluentius,
beginning with the words For there he says nothing about the charge of poisoning, but confines himself entirely to setting
forth the reasons for the hostility of Cluentius'
mother to her son. There are also statements
which do not set forth the facts of the case itself,
but facts which are none the less relevant to the
case the speaker's purpose may be to illustrate the
case by some parallel, as in the passage in the
Verrines about Lucius Domitius who crucified a
shepherd because he admitted that he had used a
hunting spear to kill the boar which he had brought
him as a present; or he may desire to dispel some
charge that is irrelevant to the case as in the passage
of the speech for Rabirius Postumus, which runs as
follows Or the orator may desire to heighten
the effect of his charges, as Cicero does in his
description of the journey of Verres. Sometimes a fictitious statement is employed
either to stir the emotions of the judges, as in that
passage of the proo Roscio Amerino dealing with
Chrysogonus to which I referred just recently, or to
entertain them with a show of wit, as in the
passage of the pro Cluentio describing the brothers
Caepasius sometimes again a digression may be
introduced to add beauty to the speech, as in the
passage about Proserpine in the Verrines, beginning All these examples serve to
show that he who denies a charge may not necessarily
refrain from stating, but may actually state that very
fact which he denies. Even the assertion which I made above to the
effect that a statement of facts familiar to the judge
is superfluous, is not to be taken too literally. My
meaning is that it may be dispensed with, if the
judge knows not merely what has been done, but
takes a view of the facts which is favourable to our
case. For the purpose of the statement of facts is
not merely to instruct, but rather to persuade the
judge. Therefore, when we desire to influence him
in some way or other, although he may require no
instruction, we shall preface our statement with
some such remarks as these At times again we may pretend
that we are repeating the facts for the benefit of
some new member of the jury, at times that we do
so with a view to letting every bystander as well realise
the gross unfairness of our opponents' assertions.
Under these circumstances our statement must be
diversified by a free use of figures to avoid wearying
those to whom the facts are familiar we shall for
instance use phrases such as , and so on. Besides, if we are always to
regard as superfluous a statement of facts made before
a judge who is familiar with the case, we may even
go so far as to regard it as superfluous at times to
plead the case at all. There is a further question which is still more
frequently raised, as to whether the statement of
facts should always follow immediately on the exordium. Those who hold that it should always do so
must be admitted to have some reason on their side.
For since the purpose of the exordium is to make
the judge more favourably disposed and more
attentive to our case and more amenable to
instruction, and since the proof cannot be brought
forward until the facts of the case are known, it
seems right that the judge should be instructed in
the facts without delay. But the practice may be
altered by circumstances, unless it is contended that
Cicero in his magnificent published defence of Milo
delayed his statement too long by placing three
questions before it; or unless it is argued that, if it
bad been held to be impermissible to defend a man
at all who acknowledged that he had killed another,
or if Milo's case had already been prejudged and
condemnation passed by the senate, or if Gnaeus
Pompeius, who in addition to exerting his influence
in other ways had surrounded the court with an
armed guard, had been regarded with apprehension
as hostile to the accused, it would have served his
case to set forth how Clodius had set an ambush for
Milo. These three questions, then, served the
purpose of an exordium, since they all of them were
designed to prepare the minds of the judges.
Again in the pro Vareno Cicero delayed his
statement of facts until he had first rebutted
certain allegations put forward by the prosecution.
This may be done with advantage whenever we
have not merely to rebut the charge, but to turn
the tables on our opponents thus after first
rebutting the charge, we make our statement of
facts the opening of an incrimination of the other
party just as in actual fighting we are most concerned to parry our adversary's blows before
we strike him ourselves. There will also not
infrequently be certain cases, in which it is easy to
rebut the charge that is under trial, but the conduct
of which is hampered by the past life of our client
and the many and serious crimes which he has
committed. We must dispose of these first, in order
that the judge may give a favourable hearing to our
defence of the actual facts which form the question
at issue. For example, if we have to defend
Marcus Caelius, the best course for his advocate to
adopt will be to meet the imputations of luxury,
wantonness and immorality which are made against
him before we proceed to the actual charge of poisoning. It is with these points that the speech of Cicero
in his defence is entirely concerned. Is he then to
go on to make a statement about the property of
Palla and explain the whole question of rioting, a
charge against which Caelius has already defended
himself in the speech which he delivered on his own
behalf We however are the victims of the practice
of the schools in accordance with which certain points
or themes as we call them are put forward for discussion, outside which our refutation must not go,
and consequently a statement of facts always follows
the exordium. It is this too that leads declaimers to
take the liberty of inserting a statement of facts even
when they speak second for their side. For when
they speak for the prosecution they introduce both a
statement of facts, as if they were speaking first, and a
refutation of the arguments for the defence, as if
they were replying and they are right in so doing.
For since declamation is merely an exercise in forensic
pleading, why should they not qualify themselves to speak either first or second Those however who
do not understand the reason for such a practice,
think that when they appear in the courts they
should stick to the custom of the schools with which
they have become familiar. But even scholastic
rhetoricians occasionally substitute a brief summary
for the full statement of the facts. For what statement of the case can be made when a wife is accusing
a jealous husband of maltreating her, or a father is
indicting his son turned Cynic before the censors
for indecent behaviour In both cases the charge
can be sufficiently indicated by one word placed
in any part of the speech. But enough of these
points. I will now proceed to the method to be adopted
in making our statement of facts. The statement of
facts consists in the persuasive exposition of that
which either has been done, or is supposed to
have been done, or, to quote the definition given by
Apollodorus, is a speech instructing the audience as to
the nature of the case in dispute. Most writers, more
especially those of the Isocratean school, hold that
it should be lucid, brief and plausible for it is of
no importance if we substitute clear for lucid, or
credible or probable for plausible. I agree with
this classification of its qualities, although Aristotle
disagrees with Isocrates on one point, and pours
scorn on his injunction to be brief, as though it
were necessary that a statement should be either
long or short and it were impossible to hit the happy
mean. The followers of Theodorus on the other
hand recognise only plausibility on the ground
that it is not always expedient that our exposition
should be either short or clear. It will be necessary therefore for me to devote some care to the differentiation of the various features of this portion of a
speech, in order that I may show under what
circumstances each is specially useful. The statement will be either wholly in our favour
or wholly in that of our opponent or a mixture of
both. If it is entirely in our own favour, we may
rest content with the three qualities just mentioned,
the result of which is to make it easier for the judge
to understand, remember and believe what we say.
Now I should regret that anyone should censure my
conduct in suggesting that a statement which is
wholly in our favour should be plausible, when as
a matter of fact it is true. There are many things
which are true, but scarcely credible, just as there
are many things which are plausible though false.
It will therefore require just as much exertion on
our part to make the judge believe what we say
when it is true as it will when it is fictitious. These
good qualities, which I have mentioned above, do
not indeed cease to be virtues in other portions of the
speech; for it is our duty to avoid obscurity in every
part of our pleading, to preserve due proportion
throughout and to say nothing save what is likely
to win belief. But they require special observance
in that portion of the speech which is the first
from which the judge can learn the nature of the
case if at this stage of the proceedings he fails to
understand, remember or believe what we say, our
labour is but lost in the remainder of the speech. We shall achieve lucidity and clearness in our
statement of facts, first by setting forth our story in
words which are appropriate, significant and free
from any taint of meanness, but not on the other hand farfetched or unusual, and secondly by giving
a distinct account of facts, persons, times, places and
causes, while our delivery must be adapted to our
matter, so that the judge will take in what we say
with the utmost readiness. This latter virtue is
disregarded by the majority of speakers who are
used to the noisy applause of a large audience,
whether it be a chance gathering or an assembly of
claqueurs, and consequently are unnerved by the
attentive silence of the courts. They feel that they
have fallen short of eloquence, if they do not make
everything echo with noise and clamour; they think
that to state a matter simply is suited only to everyday speech such as falls within the capacity of any
uneducated man, while all the time it is hard to say
whether they are less willing or less capable of
performing a task which they despise on account of
its supposed easiness. For even when they have
tried everything, they will never find anything more
difficult in the whole range of oratory than that
which, once heard, all think they would have said,
a delusion due to the fact that they regard what has
been said as having no merit save that of truth. But
it is just when an orator gives the impression of
absolute truth that he is speaking best. As it is,
when such persons as these get a fair field for stating their case, they select this as the precise occasion
for affected modulations of the voice, throwing back
their heads, thumping their sides and indulging in
every kind of extravagance of statement, language
and style. As a result, while the speech, from its
very monstrosity, meets with applause, the case
remains unintelligible. However, let us pass to
another subject; my aim is to win favour for pointing out the right road rather than to give
offence by rebuking such perversity. The statement of facts will be brief, if in the first
place we start at that point of the case at which it
begins to concern the judge, secondly avoid irrelevance, and finally cut out everything the removal
of which neither hampers the activities of the judge
nor harms our own case. For frequently conciseness
of detail is not inconsistent with length in the
whole. Take for instance such a statement as the
following Nothing could be terser
than these assertions, but it would have been quite
sufficient to say And
whenever the conclusion gives a sufficiently clear
idea of the premisses, we must be content with
having given a hint which will enable our audience
to understand what we have left unsaid. Consequently when it is possible to say it is quite superfluous to say, For this reason some of the Greeks draw a
distinction between a concise statement the word
they use is  and a brief statement, the
former being free from all superfluous matter, while
the latter may conceivably omit something that
requires to be stated. Personally, when I use the
word brevity, I mean not saying less, but not saying
more than occasion demands. As for repetitions
and tautologies and diffuseness, which some writers
of textbooks tell us we must avoid, I pass them by; they are faults which we should shun for other reasons
beside our desire for brevity. But we must be
equally on our guard against the obscurity which
results from excessive abridgment, and it is better to
say a little more than is necessary than a little less.
For though a diffuse irrelevance is tedious, the
omission of what is necessary is positively dangerous.
We must therefore avoid even tile famous terseness
of Sallust though in his case of course it is a merit,
and shun all abruptness of speech, since a style
which presents no difficulty to a leisurely reader,
flies past a hearer and will not stay to be
looked at again; and whereas the reader is
almost always a man of learning, the judge often
comes to his panel from the country side and is
expected to give a decision on what he can understand. Consequently we must aim, perhaps everywhere, but above all in our statement of facts, at
striking the happy mean in our language, and the
happy mean may be defined as saving just what
is necessary and just what is sufficient. By I mean not the bare minimum
necessary to convey our meaning; for our brevity
must not be devoid of elegance, without which it
would be merely uncouth pleasure beguiles the
attention, and that which delights us ever seems less
long, just as a picturesque and easy journey tires us
less for all its length than a difficult short cut through
an arid waste. And I would never carry my desire
for brevity so far as to refuse admission to details
which may contribute to the plausibility of our
narrative. Simplify and curtail your statement of
facts in every direction and you will turn it into
something more like a confession. Moreover, the circumstances of the case will often necessitate a
long statement of facts, in which case, as I have
already enjoined, the judge should be prepared for
it at the conclusion of the exordium. Next we must
put forth all our art either to shorten it or to render
it less tedious. We must do what we can to make
it less long by postponing some points, taking care
however to mention what it is that we propose to
postpone. Take the following as an example. Some
things indeed may be omitted altogether from our
marshalling of the facts, witness the following
example from Cicero, Division of our statement into its various
heads is another method of avoiding tedium for
example, Such a
division will give the impression of three short statements rather than of one long one. At times it will be
well to interrupt our narrative by interjecting some
brief remark like the following The
judge will be refreshed by the fact that we have
brought our previous remarks to a close and will
prepare himself for what may be regarded as a fresh
start. If however after employing all these artifices
our array of facts is still long, it will not be without
advantage to append a summary at the end of it as
a reminder Cicero does this even at the close of a brief statement of facts in the pro Ligario The statement of fact will be credible, if in the first
place we take care to say nothing contrary to nature,
secondly if we assign reasons and motives for the
facts on which the inquiry turns it is unnecessary to
do so with the subsidiary facts as well, and if we
make the characters of the actors in keeping with
the facts we desire to be believed we shall for
instance represent a person accused of theft as
covetous, accused of adultery as lustful, accused of
homicide as rash, or attribute the opposite qualities
to these persons if we are defending them further
we must do the same with place, time and the like.
It is also possible to treat the subject in such a way
as to give it an air of credibility, as is done in
comedy and farce. For some things have such natural
sequence and coherence that, if only the first
portion of your statement is satisfactory, the judge
will himself anticipate what you have got to
say in the later part. It will also be useful to
scatter some hints of our proofs here and there, but
in such a way that it is never forgotten that we are
making a statement of facts and not a proof. Sometimes, however, we must also support our assertions
by a certain amount of argument, though this must
be short and simple for instance in a case of
poisoning we shall say, The same result is produced by preparatory remarks such as the following We may in fact touch on everything that we
propose to produce in our proof; while making our
statement of facts, as for instance points connected
with persons, cause, place, time, the instrument and
occasion employed. Sometimes, when this resource
is unavailable, we may even confess that the charge,
though true, is scarcely credible, and that therefore
it must be regarded as all the more atrocious; that
we do not know how the deed was done or why, that
we are filled with amazement, but will prove our
case. The best kind of preparatory remarks are
those which cannot be recognised as such Cicero,
for instance, is extraordinarily happy in the way he
mentions in advance everything that shows that
Clodius lay in wait for Milo and not Milo for Clodius.
The most effective stroke of all is his cunning feint
of simplicity What an absence of haste
and premeditation this gives to Milo's proceedings.
And the great orator secures this effect not merely
by producing facts which indicate the slow and
tardy nature of Milo's departure, but by the use of
the ordinary language of everyday speech and a
careful concealment of his art. Had he spoken
otherwise, his words would by their very sound have
warned the judge to keep an eye on the advocate.
The majority of readers regard this passage as lacking in distinction, but this very fact merely serves to show how the art which is scarce detected by a
reader succeeded in hoodwinking the judge. It is
qualities of this kind that make the statement of facts
credible. If a student requires to be told that we
must avoid contradiction and inconsistency in our
statement of facts, it will be vain to attempt to instruct
him on the remaining points, although some writers
of text-books produce this precept as if it were a
mystery only discovered by their own personal
penetration. To these three qualities some add magnificence of
diction or as they call it this quality
is not, however, suitable to all cases. For what place
has language that rises above the ordinary level in
the majority of private suits dealing with loans,
letting and hiring and interdicts Nor yet is it
always expedient, as may be inferred from the
passage just cited from the pro Milone. We must
remember, too, that there are many cases in which
confession, excuse or modification are necessary with
regard to our statements and magnificence is a
quality wholly out of keeping with such procedure.
Magnificence of diction is therefore no more specially
appropriate to the statement of facts than language
calculated to excite pity or hatred, or characterised
by dignity, charm or wit. Each of these qualities
is admirable in its proper place, but none can be
regarded as the peculiar and inalienable property of
this portion of the speech. Theodectes asserts that the statement of facts
should not merely be magnificent, but attractive
in style. But this quality again though suitable
enough to the statement of facts, is equally so in
other portions of the speech. There are others who add palpability, which the Greeks call And I will not conceal the fact that Cicero himself
holds that more qualities are required. For in
addition to demanding that it should be plain, brief
and credible, he would have it clear, characteristic
and worthy of the occasion. But everything in
a speech should be characteristic and worthy of the
occasion as far as possible. Palpalility, as far
as I understand the term, is no doubt a great virtue,
when a truth requires not merely to be told, but to
some extent obtruded, still it may be included under
lucidity. Some, however, regard this quality as
actually being injurious at times, on the ground that
in certain cases it is desirable to obscure the truth.
This contention is, however, absurd. For he who
desires to obscure the situation, will state what is
false in lieu of the truth, but must still strive to
secure an appearance of palpability for the facts
which he narrates. A chance turn of the discussion has led us to a
difficult type of statement of facts. I will therefore
proceed to speak of those in which the facts are
against us. Under such circumstances some have
held that we should omit the statement of facts
altogether. Nothing can be more easy, except
perhaps to throw up the case altogether. But
suppose you undertake a case of this kind with
some good reason. It is surely the worst art to
admit the badness of the case by keeping silence.
We can hardly hope that the judge will be so
dense as to give a decision in favour of a case which
he knows we were unwilling to place before him.
I do not of course deny that just as there may be
some points which you should deny in your statement of facts, others which you should add, and yet again
others that you should alter, so there may be some
which you should pass over in silence. But still
only those points should be passed over which we
ought and are at liberty to treat in this way. This
is sometimes done for the sake of brevity, as in the
phrase We
must therefore distinguish between case and case.
In those where there is no question of guilt but
only of law, we may, even though the facts he
against us, admit the truth. But even in making these admissions we may to some extent lessen the odium
caused by the statement of our opponent. For even
our slaves extenuate their own faults. In some
cases, too, we may mitigate a bad impression by
words which avoid the appearance of a statement of
facts. We may say, for instance, Again we may
sometimes go near condemning our client ourselves. Sometimes we may fortify our case in advance by a
preliminary summary, from which we proceed to the
full statement of facts. All the evidence points to
the guilt of three sons who had conspired against
their father. After drawing lots they entered
their father's bedroom while he slept, one following
the other in the order predetermined and each
armed with a sword. None of them had the heart
to kill him, he woke and they confessed all. If,
however, the father, who has divided his estate
among them and is defending them when accused
of parricide, pleads as follows And if he then should
add, If such were his pleading, all these pleas would,
such as they are, find the judges all the more
disposed to mercy, since the brief defence offered
in the first summary statement would have paved
the way for them. But if the question is whether
an act has been committed or what its nature may
be, even though everything be against us, how can
we avoid a statement of facts without gross neglect
of our case The accuser has made a statement of facts
facts, and has done so not merely in such a way as
to indicate what was done, but has added such
comments as might excite strong prejudice against
us and made the facts seem worse than they are
by the language which he has used. On the top
of this have come the proofs, while the peroration
has kindled the indignation of the judges and left
them full of anger against us. The judge naturally
waits to hear what we can state in our behalf. If
we make no statement, he cannot help believing
that our opponent's assertions are correct and that
their tone represents the truth. What are we to
do then Are we to restate the same facts Yes,
if the question turns on the nature of the act, as
it will if there is no doubt about the commission,
but we must restate them in a different way,
alleging other motives and another purpose and
putting a different complexion on the case. Some
imputations we may mitigate by the use of other
words; luxury will be softened down into generosity, avarice into economy, carelessness into simplicity,
and I shall seek to win a certain amount of favour
or pity by look, voice and attitude. Sometimes a
frank confession is of itself sufficient to move the
jury to tears. And I should like to ask those who
differ from me whether they are prepared to defend
what they have refused to state, or no. For if
they refuse either to defend or to state the facts,
they will be giving away their whole case. If, on
the other hand, they do propose to put in a defence,
they must at least, as a rule, set forth what they
intend to justify. Why then not state fully facts
which can be got rid of and must in fact be pointed
out to make that possible Or again what
difference is there between a proof and a statement
of facts save that the latter is a proof put forward
in continuous form, while a proof is a verification
of the facts as put forward in the statement Let
us consider therefore whether under such circumstances the statement should not be somewhat
longer and fuller than usual, since we shall require
to make some preliminary remarks and to introduce
certain special arguments note that I say arguments,
and not argumentation, while it will add greatly
to the force of our defence if we assert not once
nor twice that we shall prove what we say is true
and that the significance of the facts cannot be
brought out by one opening statement, bidding them
wait, delay forming their opinions and hope for the
best. Finally it is important to include in our
statement anything that can be given a different
complexion from that put upon it by our opponent.
Otherwise even an exordium will be superfluous
in a case of this kind. For what is its purpose if not to make the judge better disposed for the
investigation of the case And yet it will be
agreed that the exordium is never more useful than
when it is necessary to divert the judge from some
prejudice that he has formed against us. Conjectural cases, on the other handthat is to say
questions of factrequire a statement, which will
more often deal with the circumstances from which
a knowledge of the point at issue may be derived
than with the actual point which is under trial.
When the accuser states these circumstances in
such a manner as to throw suspicion on the case for
the defence, and the accused has consequently to
dispel that suspicion, the facts must be presented to
the judge in quite a different light by the latter. But,
it may be urged, some arguments are strong when put
forward in bulk, but far less effective when employed
separately. My answer is that this remark does not
affect the question whether we ought to make a
statement of fact, but concerns the question how it
should be made. For what is there to prevent us
from amassing and producing a number of arguments
in the statement, if that is likely to help our cause
Or from subdividing our statement of facts and
appending the proofs to their respective sections
and so passing on to what remains to be said
Neither do I agree with those who assert that
the order of our statement of facts should always
follow the actual order of events, but have a preference for adopting the order which I consider
most suitable. For this purpose we can employ a
variety of figures. Sometimes, when we bring up
a point in a place better suited to our purpose,
we may pretend that it had escaped our notice; occasionally, too, we may inform the judge that we
shall adhere to the natural order for the remainder
of our statement, since by so doing we shall make
our case clearer, while at times after stating a fact,
we may append the causes which preceded it. For
there is no single law or fixed rule governing the
method of defence. We must consider what is
most advantageous in the circumstances and nature
of the case, and treat the wound as its nature
dictates, dressing at once or, if the dressing can be
delayed, applying a temporary bandage. Again I
do not regard it as a crime to repeat a statement of
a fact more than once, as Cicero does in the pro
Cluentio. It is not merely permissible, but sometimes necessary, as in trials for extortion and all
complicated cases; and only a lunatic will allow a
superstitious observance of rules to lead him counter
to the interests of his case. The reason for placing
the statement of facts before the proof is to prevent
the judge from being ignorant of the question at
issue. Why then, if each individual point has to be
proved or refuted, should not each individual point be
stated as well If my own experience may be
trusted, I know that I have followed this practice in
the courts, whenever occasion demanded it, and my
procedure has been approved both by learned authorities and the judges themselves, while the duty of
setting forth the case was generally entrusted to me.
I am not boasting, for there are many with whom I
have been associated as counsel, who can bring me to
book if I lie. On the other hand this is no reason
for not following the order of events as a general rule.
Indeed inversion of the order has at times a most
unhappy effect, as for example if you should mention first that a woman has brought forth and then that
she has conceived, or that a will has been read and
then that it has been signed. In such cases, if you
should happen to have mentioned the later incident,
it is better to say nothing about the former, which
must quite obviously have come first. Sometimes, too, we get false statements of facts;
these, as far as actual pleading in the courts is concerned, fall into two classes. In the first case the statement depends on external support; Publius Clodius,
for instance, relied on his witnesses when he stated
that he was at Interamna on the night when he committed abominable sacrilege at Rome. The other has
to be supported by the speaker's native talent, and
sometimes consists simply in an assumption of modesty,
which is, I imagine, the reason why it is called a
gloss, while at other times it will be concerned with
the question at issue. Whichever of these two forms
we employ, we must take care, first that our fiction
is within the bounds of possibility, secondly that it
is consistent with the persons, dates and places involved and thirdly that it presents a character and
sequence that are not beyond belief if possible,
it should be connected with something that is
admittedly true and should be supported by some
argument that forms part of the actual case. For if
we draw our fictions entirely from circumstances
lying outside the case, the liberty which we have
taken in resorting to falsehood will stand revealed.
Above all we must see that we do not contradict
ourselves, a slip which is far from rare on the part of
spinners of fiction for some things may put a most
favourable complexion on portions of our case, and
yet fail to agree as a whole. Further, what we say must not be at variance with the admitted truth. Even
in the schools, if we desire a gloss, we must not look
for it outside the facts laid down by our theme. In
either case the orator should bear clearly in mind
throughout his whole speech what the fiction is to
which he has committed himself, since we are apt to
forget our falsehoods, and there is no doubt about the
truth of the proverb that a liar should have a good
memory. But whereas, if the question turns on some
act of our own, we must make one statement and
stick to it, if it turns on an act committed by others,
we may cast suspicion on a number of different
points. In certain controversial themes of the schools,
however, in which it is assumed that we have put a
question and received no reply, we are at liberty to
enumerate all the possible answers that might have
been given. But we must remember only to invent
such things as cannot be checked by evidence I
refer to occasions when we make our own minds
speak and we are the only persons who are in their
secret or put words in the mouth of the dead for
what they say is not liable to contradiction or
again in the mouth of someone whose interests are
identical with ours for he will not contradict, or
finally in the mouth of our opponent for he will not
be believed if he does deny. Glosses drawn from
dreams and superstitions have long since lost their
value, owing to the very ease with which they can
be invented. But it will avail us little to use glosses
in a statement of fact, unless they are consistent
throughout the whole of our speech, more especially
as certain things can only be proved by persistent
assertion. Take for instance the case of the parasite
who claims as his son a young man who has been thrice disinherited by a wealthy father and thrice
restored to his own. He will be able to put forward
as a gloss or plea that poverty was the reason why he
exposed the child, that he assumed the role of a
parasite because his son was in the house in question
and, lastly, that the reason why the young man was
thrice disinherited was simply that he was not the
son of the man who disinherited him. But unless
every word that he utters reveals an ardent paternal
affection, hatred for his wealthy opponent and
anxiety on behalf of the youth, who will, he knows,
be exposed to serious danger if he remains in the
house where he is the victim of such dislike, he will
be unable to avoid creating the suspicion that he
has been suborned to bring the action. It sometimes happens in the controversial themes
of the schools, though I doubt whether it could ever
occur in the courts, that both sides employ the same
gloss and support it on their own behalf. An
example of this may be found in the theme which
runs as follows. No defence
can be put forward for the son which is not also a
defence of the stepmother. However, what is common to both sides of the case will be stated, and
then arguments will be drawn from a comparison of the characters of the two parties, from the order in
which they laid information against each other and
from the silence of the divorced wife. Still we
must not ignore the fact that there are some cases
which do not admit of any form of gloss, but must
be defended forthright. An example is provided by
the case of the rich man who scourged the statue
of a poor man who was his enemy, and was subsequently indicted for assault. Here no one can deny
that the act was outrageous, but it may be possible
to maintain that it is not punishable by law. If, however, part of the statement of facts tells in
our favour and part against us, we must consider
whether in view of the circumstances of the case
the parts in question should be blent or kept
apart. If the points which are damaging to our
case be in the majority, the points which are in
its favour will be swamped. Under those circumstances it will be best to keep them apart and, after
setting forth and proving the points which help our
case, to meet the rest by employing the remedies
mentioned above. If, on the other hand, it be the
points in our favour which predominate, we may
even blend them with the others, since thus the
traitors in our camp will have less force. None the
less these points, both good and bad, must not be set
forth naked and helpless those in our favour must
be supported by some argument, and then reasons
must be added why the points which tell against
us should not be believed; since if we do not distinguish clearly between the two, it is to be feared
that those which are favourable may suffer from
their bad company. Further rules are laid down with regard to the statement of fact, forbidding us to indulge in
digression, apostrophe or argumentation or to put
our words into the mouths of others. Some even
add that we should make no appeal to the passions.
These rules should for the most part be observed,
indeed they should never be infringed unless the
circumstances absolutely demand it. If our statement is to be clear and brief, almost anything can
be justified sooner than digression. And if we do
introduce a digression, it must always be short and
of such a nature that we give the impression of
having been forced from our proper course by
some uncontrollable emotion. The passage in
Cicero about the marriage of Sasia is a good example of this. As to addressing another in place of
the judge, it may be a means of making a point with
greater brevity and give it greater force. On this
subject I hold the same view that I expressed in
dealing with the exordium, as I do on the subject of
impersonation. This artifice however is employed not
only by Servius Sulpicius in his speech on behalf of
Aufidia, when he cries but by Cicero as well, when in a
passage which, like the above, belongs to the statement of facts, in speaking of the ships' captains he
says, Again
in the pro Clueniio does not the conversation
between Staienus and Bulbus conduce to speed and
enhance the credibility of the statements  In
case it should be thought that Cicero did this
without design quite an incredible supposition in
his case, I would point out that in the Partitiones
he lays it down that the statement of facts should
be characterised by passages which will charm and
excite admiration or expectation, and marked by
unexpected turns, conversations between persons and
appeals to every kind of emotion. We shall, as I
have already said, never argue points in the statement of facts, but we may sometimes introduce
arguments, as for example Cicero does in the pro
Ligario, when he says that he ruled his province in
such a way that it was to his interest that peace
should continue. We shall sometimes also, if
occasion demand, insert a brief defence of the facts
in the statement and trace the reasons that led up
to them. For we must state our facts like advocates,
not witnesses. A statement in its simplest form
will run as follows, But how will Cicero put
it  he says, And again elsewhere
he says, And when the
sense would have been sufficiently clear had he said no more than he adds Thus he made
what he stated credible by giving a reason for it
and at the same time coloured it with emotion. I am therefore all the more surprised at those
who hold that there should be no appeal to the
emotions in the statement of facts. If they were to
say I should agree with them; for it is important that
the statement should be expeditious. But why,
while I am instructing the judge, should I refuse to
move him as well Why should I not, if it is
possible, obtain that effect at the very opening of
the case which I am anxious to secure at its conclusion, more especially in view of the fact that I
shall find the judge far more amenable to the
cogency of my proof, if I have previously filled his
mind with anger or pity Does not Cicero, in his
description of the scourging of a Roman citizen, in a
few brief words stir all the emotions, not merely by
describing the victim's position, the place where the
outrage was committed and the nature of the
punishment, but also by praising the courage with
which he bore it For he shows us a man of the
highest character who, when beaten with rods,
uttered not a moan nor an entreaty, but only cried
that lie was a Roman citizen, thereby bringing
shame on his oppressor and showing his confidence
in the law. Again does he not throughout the
whole of his statement excite the warmest indignation at the misfortunes of Philodamus and move us even to tears when he speaks of his punishment
and describes, or rather shows us as in a picture,
the father weeping for the death of his son and the
son for the death of his father What can any
peroration present that is more calculated to stir
our pity If you wait for the peroration to stir your
hearer's emotions over circumstances which you
have recorded unmoved in your statement of facts,
your appeal will come too late. The judge is
already familiar with them and hears their mention
without turning a hair, since he was unstirred when
they were first recounted to him. Once the habit
of mind is formed, it is hard to change it. For my own part for I will not conceal my
opinion, though it rests rather on actual examples
than on rules, I hold that the statement of fact more
than any portion of the speech should be adorned
with the utmost grace and charm. But much will
depend on the nature of the subject which we have
to set forth. In slighter cases, such as are the
majority of private suits, the decoration must be
restrained and fit close to the subject, while the
utmost care must be exercised in choice of words.
The words which in our purple passages are swept
along by the force of our eloquence and lost in the
profusion of our language, must in cases such as
these be clear and, as Zeno says, The rhythm should be unobtrusive, but as
attractive as possible, while the figures must neither
be derived from poetry nor such as are contrary to
current usage, though warranted by the authority of
antiquity for it is important that our language should
be entirely normal, but should be designed to relieve
tedium by their variety and should be frequently changed to relax the strain of attention. Thus we
shall avoid repeating the same terminations and
escape monotony of rhythm and a stereotyped turn
of phrase. For the statement of facts lacks all the
other allurements of style and, unless it is characterised by this kind of charm, will necessarily fall flat.
Moreover there is no portion of a speech at which
the judge is more attentive, and consequently nothing
that is well said is lost. And the judge is, for some
reason or other, all the more ready to accept what
charms his ear and is lured by pleasure to belief.
When on the other hand the subject is on a larger
scale, we have a chance to excite horror by our
narration of abominable wrongs or pity by a tale
of woe but we must do so in such a way as not to
exhaust our stock of emotions on the spot, but
merely to indicate our harrowing story in outline so
that it may at once be clear what the completed
picture is like to be. Again I am far from disapproving of the introduction of some striking
sentence designed to stimulate the judge's jaded
palate. The best way of so doing is the interposition of a short sentence like the following
 at times we may even be a little more
daring and produce something like the following If this was
done in days when every speech was designed for
practical purposes rather than display and the courts
were far stricter than to-day, how much more should
we do it now, when the passion for producing a thrill of pleasure has forced its way even into cases
where a man's life or fortunes are in peril I shall
say later to what extent I think we should indulge
popular taste in this respect in the meantime I
shall admit that some such indulgence is necessary.
A powerful effect may be created if to the actual
facts of the case we add a plausible picture of what
occurred, such as will make our audience feel as if
they were actual eyewitnesses of the scene. Such
is the description introduced by Marcus Caelius in
his speech against Antonius. Could
you find anything more plausible in imagination, more
vehement in censure or more vivid in description There is another point to which I must call attention, namely the credit which accrues to the statement
of facts from the authority of the speaker. Now
such authority should first and foremost be the reward of our manner of life, but may also be conferred by our style of eloquence. For the more dignified
and serious our style, the greater will be the weight
that it will lend to our assertions. It is therefore
specially important in this part of our speech to avoid
anything suggestive of artful design, for the judge is
never more on his guard than at this stage. Nothing
must seem fictitious, nought betray anxiety; everything must seem to spring from the case itself rather
than the art of the orator. But our modern orators
cannot endure this and imagine that their art is
wasted unless it obtrudes itself, whereas as a matter
of fact the moment it is detected it ceases to be art.
We are the slaves of applause and think it the goal
of all our effort. And so we betray to the judges
what we wish to display to the bystanders. There is also a kind of repetition of the statement
which the Greeks call It belongs to
declamation rather than forensic oratory, and was invented to enable the speaker in view of the fact that
the statement should be brief to set forth his facts
at greater length and with more profusion of ornament, as a means of exciting indignation or pity. I
think that this should be done but rarely and that
we should never go to the extent of repeating the
statement in its entirety. For we can attain the same
result by a repetition only of parts. Anyone, however, who desires to employ this form of repetition,
should touch but lightly on the facts when making
his statement and should content himself with merely
indicating what was done, while promising to set
forth how it was done more fully when the time
comes for it. Some hold that the statement of facts should always
begin by referring to some person, whom we must praise if he is on our side, and abuse if he is on the
side of our opponents. It is true that this is very
often done for the good reason that a law-suit must
take place between persons. Persons may however
also be introduced with all their attendant circumstances, if such a procedure is likely to prove useful.
For instance, Or again they may be introduced without such circumstances, as in the
passage beginning Often, too, we may commence with a fact as Cicero
does in the pro Tullio or Demosthenes in the speech in defence of Ctesiphonl, As regards the conclusion of the statement of facts,
there is a controversy with those who would have
the statement end where the issue to be determined
begins. Here is an example. This rule
can always be observed by the prosecutor, but not
always by the defendant. III. In the natural order of things the statement of fact is followed by the verification. For it is necessary to prove the points which we stated
with the proof in view. But before I enter on this
portion, I have a few words to say on the opinions
held by certain rhetoricians. Most of them are in
the habit, as soon as they have completed the statement of facts, of digressing to some pleasant and
attractive topic with a view to securing the utmost
amount of favour from their audience. This practice
originated in the display of the schools of declaration and thence extended to the courts as soon as
causes came to be pleaded, not for the benefit of the
parties concerned, but to enable the advocates to
flaunt their talents. I imagine that they feared that
if the slender stream of concise statement, such as is
generally required, were followed by the pugnacious
tone inevitable in the arguing of the case, the speech
would fall flat owing to the postponement of the
pleasures of a more expansive eloquence. The objection to this practice lies in the fact that they do
this without the slightest consideration of the
difference between case and case or reflecting
whether what they are doing will in any way assist
them, on the assumption that it is always expedient
and always necessary. Consequently they transfer
striking thoughts from the places which they should
have occupied elsewhere and concentrate them in
this portion of the speech, a practice which involves
either the repetition of a number of things that they
have already said or their omission from the place
which was really theirs owing to the fact that they
have already been said. I admit however that this
form of digression can be advantageously appended,
not merely to the statement of facts, but to each of
the different questions or to the questions as a whole, so long as the case demand, or at any rate permit it.
Indeed such a practice confers great distinction and
adornment on a speech, but only if the digression
fits in well with the rest of the speech and follows
naturally on what has preceded, not if it is thrust in
like a wedge parting what should naturally come
together. For there is no part of a speech so closely
connected with any other as the statement with the
proof, though of course such a digression may be
intended as the conclusion of the statement and the
beginning of the proof There will therefore sometimes be room for digression; for example if the end
of the statement has been concerned with some specially horrible theme, we may embroider the theme
as though our indignation must find immediate
vent. This, however, should only be done if
there is no question about the facts. Otherwise it is more important to verify your charge than
to heighten it, since the horrible nature of a charge
is in favour of the accused, until the charge is
proved. For it is just the most flagrant crimes that
are the most difficult to prove. Again a digression
may be advantageous if after setting forth the services
rendered by your client to his opponent you denounce
the latter for his ingratitude, or after producing a
variety of charges in your statement, you point out
the serious danger in which the advancement of such
charges is likely to involve you. But all these digressions should be brief. For as soon as he has
heard the facts set forth in order, the judge is in a
hurry to get to the proof and desires to satisfy himself of the correctness of his impressions at the
earliest possible moment. Further, care must be
taken not to nullify the effect of the statement by diverting the minds of the court to some other theme
and wearying them by useless delay. But, though such digressions are not always necessary at the end of the statement, they may form a very
useful preparation for the examination of the main
question, more especially if at first sight it presents
an aspect unfavourable to our case, if we have to
support a harsh law or demand severe punishment.
For this is the place for inserting what may be
regarded as a second exordium with a view to
exciting or mollifying the judge or disposing him
to lend a favouring ear to our proofs. Moreover we can do this with all the greater freedom
and vehemence at this stage of the proceedings
since the case is already known to the judge. We
shall therefore employ such utterances as emollients to soften the harder elements of our statement, in order that the ears of the jury may be
more ready to take in what we have to say in the
sequel and to grant us the justice which we ask.
For it is hard to persuade a man to do anything
against the grain. It is also important on such
occasions to know whether the judge prefers equity
or a strict interpretation of the law, since the necessity for such digression will vary accordingly. Such passages may also serve as a kind of peroration after the main question. The Greeks call
this the Romans egressus or egressio
digression. They may however, as I have said,
be of various kinds and may deal with different
themes in any portion of the speech. For instance
we may extol persons or places, describe regions,
record historical or even legendary occurrences. As
examples I may cite the praise of Sicily and the rape of Proserpine in the Verrines, or the famous recital of
the virtues of Gneius Pompeius in the pro Cornelio,
where the great orator as though the course of his
eloquence had been broken by the mere mention of
the general's name, interrupts the topic on which he
had already embarked and digresses forthwith to sing
his praises. may, I think, be defined as the
handling of some theme, which must however have
some bearing on the case, in a passage that involves
digression from the logical order of our speech. I do
not see therefore why it should be assigned a special
position immediately following on the statement of
facts any more than I understand why they think
that the name is applicable only to a digression where
some statement has to be made, when there are so
many different ways in which a speech may leave
the direct route. For whatever we say that falls
outside the five divisions of the speech already laid
down is a digression, whether it express indignation,
pity, hatred, rebuke, excuse, conciliation or be designed to rebut invective. Other similar occasions
for digression on points not involved by the question
at issue arise when we amplify or abridge a topic,
make any kind of emotional appeal or introduce any
of those topics which add such charm and elegance
to oratory, topics that is to say such as luxury,
avarice, religion, duty but these would hardly
seem to be digressions as they are so closely attached
to arguments on similar subjects that they form part
of the texture of the speech. There are however a
number of topics which are inserted in the midst of
matter which has no connexion with them, when
for example we strive to excite, admonish, appease,
entreat or praise the judge. Such passages are innumerable. Some will have been carefully prepared beforehand, while others will be produced to
suit the occasion or the necessity of the moment, if
anything extraordinary should occur in the course of
our pleading, such as an interruption, the intervention of some individual or a disturbance. For example,
this made it necessary for Cicero to digress even in
the exordium when he was defending Milo, as is
clear from the short speech which he made on
that occasion. But the orator who makes some
preface to the main question or proposes to
follow up his proofs with a passage designed to
commend them to the jury, may digress at some
length. On the other hand, if he breaks as say in
the middle of his speech, he should not be long in
returning to the point from which he departed. IV. After the statement of facts some place the
proposition which they regard as forming a division
of a forensic speech. I have already expressed
my opinion of this view. But it seems to me
that the beginning of every proof is a proposition,
such as often occurs in the demonstration of the
main question and sometimes even in the enunciation
of individual arguments, more especially of those
which are called But for the moment
I shall speak of the first kind. It is not always necessary to employ it. The nature of the main question
is sometimes sufficiently clear without any proposition,
especially if the statement of facts ends exactly where
the question begins. Consequently the recapitulation generally employed in the case of arguments is
sometimes placed immediately after the statement
of facts. Sometimes proposition is highly advantageous, more
especially when the fact cannot be defended and
the question turns on the definition of the fact;
as for example in the case of the man who has taken
the money of a private individual from a temple we
shall say, so
that the judge may understand that his sole duty is
to decide whether the charge is tantamount to
sacrilege. The same method may be employed
in obscure or complicated cases, not merely to make
the case clearer, but sometimes also to make it more
moving. This effect will be produced, if we at once
support our pleading with some such words as the
following For this proposition forces a confession upon our opponent and to a certain extent
accelerates the decision of the court. It does more
than indicate the question, it contributes to its
solution. Propositions may be single, double or manifold
this is due to more than one reason. For several
charges may be combined, as when Socrates was
accused of corrupting the youth and of introducing
new superstitions; while single propositions may be
made up of a number of arguments, as for instance
when Aeschines is accused of misconduct as an
ambassador on the ground that he lied, failed to carry out his instructions, wasted time and accepted
bribes. The defence may also contain several propositions for instance against a claim for money we
may urge, These propositions can be multiplied at pleasure, but
it is sufficient to give an indication of my meaning.
If propositions are put forward singly with the proofs
appended, they will form several distinct propositions
if they are combined, they fall under the head of
partition. A proposition may also be put forward unsupported, as is generally done in conjectural cases Or it may be
accompanied by a reason I In addition to these forms of
proposition we can also introduce a proposition of our
own, such as or may
use the proposition of our opponent, such as or
finally we may employ a proposition which is common
to both sides, such as Sometimes we may even couple contradictory
propositions, as for instance We may at times produce the effect of a proposition, even though it is not in itself a proposition, by
adding after the statement of facts some phrase such
as the following thereby reminding the
judge to give special attention to the question and
giving him a fillip to emphasise the point that we
have finished the statement of facts and are beginning
the proof, so that when we start to verify our statements he may realise that he has reached a fresh stage
where he must begin to listen with renewed attention. V. Partition may be defined as the enumeration in
order of our own propositions, those of our adversary
or both. It is held by some that this is indispensable on the ground that it makes the case clearer
and the judge more attentive and more ready to be
instructed, if he knows what we are speaking about
and what we are going subsequently to speak about.
Others, on the contrary, think that such a course is
dangerous to the speaker on two grounds, namely
that sometimes we may forget to perform what we
have promised and may, on the other hand, come
upon something which we have omitted in the partition. But this will never happen to anyone unless
he is either a fool or has come into court without
thinking out his speech in detail beforehand. Besides, what can be simpler or clearer than a straightforward partition  It follows nature as a guide and
the adhesion to a definite method is actually of the
greatest assistance to the speaker's memory. Therefore I cannot approve the view even of those who
lay down that partition should not extend beyond
the length of three propositions. No doubt there is
a danger, if our partition is too complicated, that it may slip the memory of the judge and disturb his
attention. But that is no reason why it should be
tied down to a definite number of propositions, since
the case may quite conceivably require more. There
are further reasons why we should sometimes dispense with partition. In the first place there are
many points which can be produced in a more
attractive manner, if they appear to be discovered on
the spot and not to have been brought ready made
from our study, but rather to have sprung from the
requirements of the case itself while we were speaking. Thus we get those not unpleasing figures such
as or For if we set forth
all that we propose to prove in advance, we shall
deprive ourselves of the advantage springing from
tile charm of novelty. Sometimes we shall even
have to hoodwink the judge and work upon him by
various artifices so that he may think that our aim is
other than what it really is. For there are cases
when a proposition may be somewhat startling if the
judge foresees this, he will shrink from it in advance,
like a patient who catches sight of the surgeon's
knife before the operation. On the other hand, if
we have given him no preliminary notice and our
words take him unawares, without his interest in
them having been previously roused by any warning,
we shall gain a credence which we should not have
secured had we stated that we were going to raise
the point. At times we must not merely avoid
distinguishing between the various questions, but must
omit them altogether, while our audience must be
distracted by appeals to the emotion and their attention diverted. For the duty of the orator is not merely to instruct the power of eloquence is greatest
in emotional appeals. Now there is no room for
passion if we devote our attention to minute and
microscopic division at a time when we are seeking
to mislead the judgment of the person who is trying
the case. Again, there are certain arguments which
are weak and trivial when they stand alone, but
which have great force when produced in a body.
We must, therefore, concentrate such arguments,
and our tactics should be those of a sudden charge
in mass. This, however, is a practice which should
be resorted to but rarely and only under extreme
necessity when reason compels us to take a course
which is apparently irrational. In addition it must
be pointed out that in any partition there is always
some one point of such special importance, that when
the judge has heard it he is impatient with the remainder, which he regards as superfluous. Consequently if we have to prove or refute a number of
points partition will be both useful and attractive,
since it will indicate in order what we propose to say
on each subject. On the other hand, if we are defending one point on various grounds partition will
be unnecessary. If you were to make a partition such
as the following, in that case all the proofs
which you propose to bring before this, the final
proof, must needs seem superfluous to the judge.
For the judge is always in a hurry to reach the most
important point. If he has a patient disposition he
will merely make a silent appeal to the advocate, whom he will treat as bound by his promise. On
the other hand, if he is busy, or holds exalted
position, or is intolerant by nature, he will insist in
no very courteous manner on his coming to the point.
For these reasons there are some who disapprove of
the partition adopted by Cicero in the pro Cluentio,
where he premises that he is going to show, first, secondly, and
finally, They argue
that if the third point can be proved, there is no
need to have urged the two preceding. On the
other hand you will find no one so unreasonable or so
foolish as to deny that the partition in the pro Murena
is admirable. These words make the case as
clear as possible, and no one division renders any
other superfluous. There are also a number who are in doubt as to
a form of defence which I may exemplify as follows What, they ask, is the value of the
first part, if the second can be proved, since they are
mutually inconsistent, and if anyone employs both
arguments, we should believe neither This contention is partially justified; we should employ the second alone only if the fact can be proved without
a doubt. But if we have any doubts as to being able
to prove the stronger argument, we shall do well to
rely on both. Different arguments move different
people. He who thinks that the act was committed
may regard it as a just act, while he who is deaf to
the plea that the act was just may perhaps believe
that it was never committed one who is confident
of his powers as a marksman may be content with one
shaft, whereas he who has no such confidence will do
well to launch several and give fortune a chance to
come to his assistance. Cicero in the pro Milone
reveals the utmost skill in showing first that Clodius
laid an ambush for Milo and then in adding as a
supernumerary argument that, even if he had not
done so, he was nevertheless so bad a citizen that
his slaying could only have done credit to the
patriotism of the slayer and redounded to his glory.
I would not however entirely condemn the order
mentioned above, since there are certain arguments
which, though hard in themselves, may serve to
soften those which come after. The proverb, is not wholly unreasonable. Still no one
should interpret it to mean that you must stop short
of nothing. For the Greeks are right when they
lay it down as a rule that we should not attempt
the impossible. But whenever the double-barrelled
defence of which I am speaking is employed, we
must aim at making the first argument support the
credibility of the second. For he who might without danger to himself have confessed to the commission of the act, can have no motive for lying
when he denies the commission. Above all it is important, whenever we suspect
that the judge desires a proof other than that on
which we are engaged, to promise that we will satisfy
him on the point fully and without delay, more
especially if the question is one of our client's
honour. But it will often happen that a discreditable case has the law on its side, and to prevent
the judges giving us only a grudging and reluctant hearing on the point of law, we shall have to
warn them with some frequency that we shall shortly
proceed to defend our client's honour and integrity,
if they will only wait a little and allow us to follow
the order of our proofs. We may also at times
pretend to say certain things against the wishes of
our clients, as Cicero does in the pro Cluentio when
he discusses the law dealing with judicial corruption.
Occasionally we may stop, as though interrupted by
our clients, while often we shall address them and
exhort them to let us act as we think best. Thus
we shall make a gradual impression on the mind of
the judge, and, buoyed up by the hope that we are
going to clear our client's honour, he will be less ill-disposed toward the harder portions of our proof.
And when he has accepted these, he will be all the
readier to listen to our defence of our client's
character. Thus the two points will render mutual
assistance to each other; the judge will be more
attentive to our legal proofs owing to his hope that
we shall proceed to a vindication of character and
better disposed to accept that vindication because
we have proved our point of law. But although partition is neither always necessary
nor useful, it will, if judiciously employed, greatly add to the lucidity and grace of our speech. For
it not only makes our arguments clearer by isolating
the points from the crowd in which they would
otherwise be lost and placing them before the
eyes of the judge, but relieves his attention by
assigning a definite limit to certain parts of our
speech, just as our fatigue upon a journey is relieved
by reading the distances on the milestones which we
pass. For it is a pleasure to be able to measure how
much of our task has been accomplished, and the
knowledge of what remains to do stimulates us to
fresh effort over the labour that still awaits us. For
nothing need seem long, when it is definitely known
how far it is to the end. Quintus Hortensius
deserves the high praise which has been awarded
him for the care which he took over his partitions,
although Cicero more than once indulges in kindly
mockery of his habit of counting his headings on his
fingers. For there is a limit to gesture, and we must
be specially careful to avoid excessive minuteness and
any suggestion of articulated structure in our partition.
If our divisions are too small, they cease to be limbs
and become fragments, and consequently detract not
a little from the authority of our speech. Moreover,
those who are ambitious of this sort of reputation,
in order that they may appear to enhance the nicety
and tile exhaustive nature of their division, introduce
what is superfluous and subdivide things which
naturally form a single whole. The result of their
labours is, however, not so much to increase the
number of their divisions as to diminish their importance, and after all is done and they have split
up their argument into a thousand tiny compartments,
they fall into that very obscurity which the partition
was designed to eliminate. The proposition, whether single or multiple, must,
on every occasion when it can be employed with
profit, be clear and lucid; for what could be more
discreditable than that a portion of the speech,
whose sole purpose is to prevent obscurity elsewhere, should itself be obscure Secondly it must
be brief and must not be burdened with a single
superfluous word; for we are not explaining what
we are saying, but what we are going to say. We
must also ensure that it is free alike from omissions
and from redundance. Redundance as a rule occurs
through our dividing into species when it would be
sufficient to divide into genera, or through the addition of species after stating the genus. The following
will serve as an example But justice and abstinence
are species of tile genus virtue. Our first partition
will be between admitted and disputed facts.
Admitted facts will then be divided into those
acknowledged by our opponent and those acknowledged by ourselves. Disputed facts will be divided
into those which we and those which our opponents
allege. But the worst fault of all is to treat your
points in an order different from that which was
assigned them in your proposition. div1