Style has three kinds of excellence, correctness, lucidity and elegance for many include the
all-important quality of appropriateness under the
heading of elegance. Its faults are likewise threefold, namely the opposites of these excellences. The
teacher of literature therefore must study the rules
for correctness of speech, these constituting the
first part of his art. The observance of these rules
is concerned with either one or more words. I must
now be understood to use verbum in its most general
sense. It has of course two meanings; the one covers
all the parts of which language is composed, as in
the line of Horace the other restricts it to a part of speech such as
lego and scribo. To avoid this ambiguity, some
authorities prefer the terms voces, locutiones, dictiones. Individual words will either be native or imported,
simple or compound, literal or metaphorical, in
current use or newly-coined. A single word is more likely to be faulty than
to possess any intrinsic merit. For though we
may speak of a word as appropriate, distinguished
or sublime, it can possess none of these properties
save in relation to connected and consecutive speech;
since when we praise words, we do so because they
suit the matter. There is only one excellence that can be isolated for consideration, namely euphony,
the Greek term for our uocalitas that is to say that,
when we are confronted with making a choice
between two exact synonyms, we must select that
which sounds best. In the first place barbarisms and solecisms must not
be allowed to intrude their offensive presence. These
blemishes are however pardoned at times, because
we have become accustomed to them or because they
have age or authority in their favour or are near akin
to positive excellences, since it is often difficult to distinguish such blemishes from figures of speech.1 The
teacher therefore, that such slippery customers may
not elude detection, must seek to acquire a delicate
discrimination; but of this I will speak later when
I come to discuss figures of speech. For the present
I will define barbarism as an offence occurring in
connexion with single words. Some of my readers
may object that such a topic is beneath the dignity
of so ambitious a work. But who does not know
that some barbarisms occur in writing, others in
speaking For although what is incorrect in
writing will also be incorrect in speech, the converse
is not necessarily true, inasmuch as mistakes in
writing are caused by addition or omission, substitution or transposition, while mistakes in speaking are
due to separation or combination of syllables, to
aspiration or other errors of sound. Trivial as these
points may seem, our boys are still at school and I
am reminding their instructors of their duty. And
if one of our teachers is lacking in education and
has done no more than set foot in the outer courts
of his art, he will have to confine himself to the
rules published in the elementary text-books the more learned teacher on the other hand will be in a
position to go much further first of all, for example,
he will point out that there are many different kinds
of barbarism. One kind is due to race, such as the
insertion of a Spanish or African term; for instance
the iron tire of a wheel is called cantus, though
Persius uses it as established in the Latin language;
Catullus picked up ploxenum a box in the valley
of the Po, while the author of the in Pollionem, be
he Labienus or Cornelius Gallus, imported casamo
from Gaul in the sense of As for
mastruca, which is Sardinian for a it
is introduced by Cicero merely as an object of derision. Another kind of barbarism proceeds from the
speaker's temper for instance, we regard it as barbarous if a speaker use cruel or brutal language. A third and very common kind, of which anyone
may fashion examples for himself, consists in the
addition or omission of a letter or syllable, or in the
substitution of one for another or in placing one
where it has no right to be. Some teachers however,
to display their learning, are in the habit of picking
out examples of barbarism from the poets and attacking the authors whom they are expounding for
using such words. A boy should however realize
that in poets such peculiarities are pardonable or
even praiseworthy, and should therefore be taught
less common instances. For Tinga of Placentia, if
we may believe Hortensius who takes him to task for
it, committed two barbarisms in one word by saying
precula for pergula that is to say he substituted c
for g, and transposed r and e. On the other hand when Ennius writes Mettocoque Fufetioeo, where
the barbarism is twice repeated, he is defended on
the plea of poetic licence. Substitution is however
sometimes admitted even in prose, as for instance
when Cicero speaks of the army of Canopus which is
locally styled Canobus, while the number of authors
who have been guilty of transposition in writing
Trasumennus for Tarsumennus has succeeded in standardising the error. Similar instances may be quoted.
If adsentior be regarded as the correct form, we must
remember that Sisenna said adsentio, and that many
have followed him on the ground of analogy on
the other hand, if adsentio is the correct form, we
must remember that adsentior has the support of
current usage. And yet our fat fool, the fashionable
schoolmaster, will regard one of these forms as an
example of omission or the other as an instance
of addition. Again there are words which when
used separately are undoubtedly incorrect, but
when used in conjunction excite no unfavourable
comment. For instance dua and tre are barbarisms
and differ in gender, but the words duapondo
and trepondo have persisted in common parlance
down to our own day, and Messala shows that the
practice is correct. It may perhaps seem absurd to
say that a barbarism, which is an error in a single
word, may be made, like a solecism, by errors in
connexion with number or gender. But take on the
one hand scala stairs and scopa which literally
means a twig, but is used in the sense of broom
and on the other hand hordea barley and mulsa
mead here we have substitution, omission and
addition of letters, but the blemish consists in the
former case merely in the use of singular for plural, in the latter of plural for singular. Those on the
other hand who have used the word gladia are guilty
of a mistake in gender. I merely mention these as
instances I do not wish anyone to think that I
have added a fresh problem to a subject into which
the obstinacy of pedants has already introduced
confusion. The faults which arise in the course of actual
speaking require greater penetration on the part
of the critic, since it is impossible to cite examples
from writing, except in cases where they occur
in poetry, as when the diphthong is divided into
two syllables in Europai and Asiai; or when the
opposite fault occurs, called synaeresis or synaloephe
by the Greeks and complexio by ourselves as an
example I may quote the line of Publius Varro If this were prose, it would be possible to give
the letters their true syllabic value. I may mention
as further anomalies peculiar to poetry the lengthening of a short syllable as in Italiam fato profugus,
or the shortening of a long such as unius ob noxam
et furias; but in poetry we cannot label these as
actual faults. Errors in sound on the other hand
can be detected by the ear alone; although in Latin,
as regards the addition or omission of the aspirate,
the question may be raised whether this is an error
when it occurs in writing; for there is some doubt
whether h is a letter or merely a breathing, practice
having frequently varied in different ages. Older
authors used it but rarely even before vowels, saying
aedus or ircus, while its conjunction with consonants
was for a long time avoided, as in words such as Graccus or triumpus. Then for a short time it broke
out into excessive use, witness such spelling as chorona,
chenturia or praecho, which may still be read in certain
inscriptions the well-known epigram of Catullus
will be remembered in this connexion. The spellings
vehementer, comprehendere and mihi have lasted to our
own day and among early writers, especially of
tragedy, we actually find mehe for me in the older MSS. It is still more difficult to detect errors of tenor or
tone I note that old writers spell the word tonor,
as derived from the Greek , or of accent, styled
prosody by the Greeks, such as the substitution of
the acute accent for the grave or the grave for the
acute such an example would be the placing of the
acute accent on the first syllable of Camillus, or the
substitution of the grave for the circumflex in Cethegus,
an error which results in the alteration of the
quantity of the middle syllable, since it means
making the first syllable acute; or again the substitution of the circumflex for the grave on the
second syllable of Appi, where the contraction of
two syllables into one circumflexed syllable involves
a double error. This, however, occurs far more frequently in Greek words such as Atrei, which in our
young days was pronounced by the most learned of
our elders with an acute accent on the first syllable,
necessitating a grave accent on the second; the
same remark applies to Nerei and Terei. Such has
been the tradition as regards accents. Still I am well aware that certain learned men
and some professed teachers of literature, to ensure
that certain words may be kept distinct, sometimes
place an acute accent on the last syllable, both when
they are teaching and in ordinary speech as, for
instance, in the following passage where they make the last syllable of circum acute on
the ground that, if that syllable were given the grave
accent, it might be thought that they meant circus
not circuitus. Similarly when quale is interrogative,
they give the final syllable a grave accent, but when
using it in a comparison, make it acute. This practice,
however, they restrict almost entirely to adverbs
and pronouns; in other cases they follow the old
usage. Personally I think that in such phrases
as these the circumstances are almost entirely altered
by the fact that we join two words together. For
when I say circum litora I pronounce the phrase as
one word, concealing the fact that it is composed of
two, consequently it contains but one acute accent,
as though it were a single word. The same thing
occurs in the phrase Troiae qui primus ab oris. It
sometimes happens that the accent is altered by
the metre as in pecudes pictaeque volucres; for I shall
read volucres with the acute on the middle syllable,
because, although that syllable is short by nature, it
is long by position else the last two syllables
would form an iambus, which its position in the
hexameter does not allow. But these same words,
if separated, will form no exception to the rule or
if the custom under discussion prevails, the old law of the language will disappear. This law is more
difficult for the Greeks to observe, because they
have several dialects, as they call them, and what is
wrong in one may be right in another. But with us
the rule is simplicity itself. For in every word
the acute accent is restricted to three syllables,
whether these be the only syllables in the word or
the three last, and will fall either on the penultimate
or the antepenultimate. The middle of the three
syllables of which I speak will be acute or circumflexed, if long, while if it be short, it will have a
grave accent and the acute will be thrown back to
the preceding syllable, that is to say the antepenultimate. Every word has an acute accent, but
never more than one. Further the acute never falls
on the last syllable and therefore in dissyllabic words
marks the first syllable. Moreover the acute accent
and the circumflex are never found in one and the
same word, since the circumflex itself contains an
acute accent. Neither the circumflex nor the acute,
therefore, will ever be found in the last syllable of
a Latin word, with this exception, that monosyllables
must either be acute or circumflexed; otherwise we
should find words without an acute accent at all. There are also faults of sound, which we cannot reproduce in writing, as they spring from defects of the
voice and tongue. The Greeks who are happier in
inventing names than we are call them iotacisms,
lambdacisms, attenuations and broadenings; they also use the term when the voice seems to proceed from the depths of
the mouth. There are also certain peculiar and
indescribable sounds for which we sometimes take
whole nations to fault. To sum up then, if all the
faults of which we have just spoken be avoided, we shall be in possession of the Greek that is to say, an exact and pleasing articulation; for
that is what we mean when we speak of correct
pronunciation. All other faults in speaking are concerned with
more words than one; among this class of faults is
the solecism, although there have been controversies
about this as well. For even those who acknowledge
that it occurs in connected speech, argue that, since
it can be corrected by the alteration of one word,
the fault lies in the word and not in the phrase or
sentence. For example whether amarae corticis or
medio cortice contains a solecism in gender and
personally I object to neither, as Vergil is the
author of both; however, for the sake of argument
let us assume that one of the two is incorrect, still
whichever phrase is incorrect, it can be set right by
the alteration of the word in which the fault lies
that is to say we can emend either to amari corticis
or media cortice. But it is obvious that these critics
misrepresent the case. For neither word is faulty
in itself; the error arises from its association with
another word. The fault therefore lies in the
phrase. Those who raise the question as to whether
a solecism can arise in a single word show greater
intelligence. Is it for instance a solecism if a man
when calling a single person to him says uenite,
or in dismissing several persons says abi or discede
Or again if the answer does not correspond to the
question suppose, for example, when someone said
to you , you were to reply Some too think it a solecism if the spoken word is
contradicted by the motion of hand or head. I do
not entirely concur with this view nor yet do I wholly dissent. I admit that a solecism may occur
in a single word, but with this proviso there must
be something else equivalent to another word, to
which the word, in which the error lies, can be
referred, so that the solecism arises from the faulty
connexion of those symbols by which facts are expressed and purpose indicated. To avoid all suspicion of quibbling, I will say that a solecism may
occur in one word, but never in a word in isolation.
There is, however, some controversy as to the
number and nature of the different kinds of solecism.
Those who have dealt with the subject most fully
make a fourfold division, identical with that which
is made in the case of barbarisms solecisms are
brought about by addition, for instance in phrases
such as nam enim, de susum, in Alexandriam; by
omission, in phrases such as ambulo viam, Aegypto
venio, or ne hoc fecit and by transposition as in
quoque ego, enim hoc voluit, aulem non habuit. Under
this last head comes the question whether igitur can
be placed first in a sentence for I note that authors
of the first rank disagree on this point, some of
them frequently placing it in that position, others
never. Some distinguish these three classes of
error from the solecism, styling addition a pleonasm,
omission an ellipse, and transposition anastrophe and
they assert that if anastrophe is a solecism, hyperbaton
might also be so called. About substitution, that is
when one word is used instead of another, there is
no dispute. It is an error which we may detect in
connexion with all the parts of speech, but most
frequently in the verb, because it has greater variety than any other consequently in connexion with the
verb we get solecisms of gender, tense, person and
mood or or if you prefer either
of these terms, be these types of error six in number,
as some assert, or eight as is insisted by others for
the number of the forms of solecism will depend on
the number of subdivisions which you assign to the
parts of speech of which we have just spoken.
Further there are solecisms of number; now Latin
has two numbers, singular and plural, while Greek
possesses a third, namely the dual. There have
however been some who have given us a dual as
well in words such as scripsere and legere, in which
as a matter of fact the final syllable has been
softened to avoid harshness, just as in old writers
we find male merere for male mereris. Consequently
what they assert to be a dual is concerned solely
with this one class of termination, whereas in Greek
it is found throughout the whole structure of the
verb and in nouns as well, though even then it is
but rarely used. But we find not a trace of such a
usage in any Latin author. On the contrary phrases
such as devenere locos, conticuere omnes and
consedere duces clearly prove that they have nothing to do with the dual. Moreover dixere, although Antonius Rufus cites it as proof to the
contrary, is often used by the usher in the courts to
denote more than two advocates. Again, does not
Livy near the beginning of his first book write
tenuere arcem Sabini and later in adversum Romani
subiere But I can produce still better authority.
For Cicero in his Orator says, Similarly in vocables and
nouns solecisms occur in connexion with gender,
number and more especially case, by substitution
of one for another. To these may be added
solecisms in the use of comparatives and superlatives,
or the employment of patronymics instead of
possessives and vice versa. As for solecisms connected
with expressions of quantity, there are some who
will regard phrases such as magnum peculiolum as a
solecism, because the diminutive is used instead of
the ordinary noun, which implies no diminution. I
think I should call it a misuse of the diminutive rather
than a solecism; for it is an error of sense, whereas
solecisms are not errors of sense, but rather faulty
combinations of words. As regards participles,
solecisms occur in case and gender as with nouns, in
tense as with verbs, and in number as in both.
The pronoun admits of solecisms in gender, number
and case. Solecisms also occur with great frequency in connexion with parts of speech but
a bare statement on this point is not sufficient,
as it may lead a boy to think that such error
consists only in the substitution of one part of
speech for another, as for instance if a verb is
placed where we require a noun, or an adverb takes
the place of a pronoun and so on. For there are
some nouns which are cognate, that is to say of the
same genus, and he who uses the wrong species in
connexion with one of these will be guilty of the
same offence as if he were to change the genus.
Thus an and aut are conjunctions, but it would be
bad Latin to say in a question hic and ille sit; ne and non are adverbs but he who says non feceris in lieu
of ne feceris, is guilty of a similar mistake, since one
negative denies, while the other forbids. Further
intro and intus are adverbs of place, but eo intus and
intro sum are solecisms. Similar errors may be
committed in connexion with the various kinds of
pronouns, interjections and prepositions. It is also
a solecism if there is a disagreement between what
precedes and what follows within the limits of a
single clause. Some phrases have all the appearance
of a solecism and yet cannot be called faulty; take
for instance phrases such as tragoedia Thyestes or
ludi Floralia and Megalensia although these are
never found in later times, they are the rule in
ancient writers. We will therefore style them figures
and, though their use is more frequent in poets, will
not deny their employment even to orators. Figures
however will generally have some justification,
as I shall show in a later portion of this work, which
I promised you a little while back. I must however point out that a figure, if used unwittingly,
will be a solecism. In the same class, though they
cannot be called figures, come errors such as the use
of masculine names with a female termination and
feminine names with a neuter termination. I have
said enough about solecisms; for I did not set out to
write a treatise on grammar, but was unwilling to
slight the science by passing it by without salutation,
when it met me in the course of my journey. I therefore resume the path which I prescribed
for myself and point out that words are either native or foreign. Foreign words, like our population
and our institutions, have come to us from practically
every nation upon earth. I pass by words of Tuscan,
Sabine and Praenestine origin; for though Lucilius
attacks Vettius for using them, and Pollio reproves
Livy for his lapses into the dialect of Padua, I may be
allowed to regard all such words as of native origin.
Many Gallic words have become current coin, such
as raeda chariot and petorritim four-wheeled
wagon of which Cicero uses the former and Horace
the latter. Mappa napkin again, a word familiar
in connexion with the circus, is claimed by the
Carthaginians, while I have heard that gurdus, which
is colloquially used in the sense of is
derived from Spain. But this distinction between
native and foreign words has reference chiefly to
Greek. For Latin is largely derived from that
language, and we use words which are admittedly
Greek to express things for which we have no Latin
equivalent. Similiarly they at tines borrow words
from us. In this connexion the problem arises
whether foreign words should be declined according
to their language or our own. If you come across
an archaistic grammarian, he will insist on absolute
conformity to Latin practice, because, since we have
an ablative and the Greeks have not, it would be
absurd in declining a word to use five Greek
cases and one Latin. He will also praise the
patriotism of those who aimed at strengthening the
Latin language and asserted that we had no need
of foreign practices. They, therefore, pronounced
Castorem with the second syllable long to bring it
into conformity with all those Latin nouns which
have the same termination in the nominative as Castor. They also insisted on the forms Palaemo,
Telamo, and Plato the last being adopted by Cicero,
because they could not find any Latin nouns ending
in -on. They were reluctant even to permit
masculine Greek nouns to end in -as in the nominative case, and consequently in Caelius we find Pelia
cincinnatus and in Messala bene fecit Euthia, and in
Cicero Hermagora. So we need not be surprised
that the majority of early writers said Aenea and
Anchisa. For, it was urged, if such words are spelt
like Maecenas, Sufenas and Asprenas, the genitive
should terminate in -is not in -e. On the same
principle they placed an acute accent on the middle
syllable of Olympus and tyrannus, because Latin does
not allow an acute accent on the first syllable if it is
short and is followed by two long syllables. So too
we get the Latinised genitives Ulixi and Achilli together with many other analogous forms. More recent
scholars have instituted the practice of giving Greek
nouns their Greek declension, although this is not
always possible. Personally I prefer to follow the
Latin method, so far as grace of diction will permit.
For I should not like to say Calypsonem on the analogy
of Iunonem, although Gaius Caesar in deference to
antiquity does adopt this way of declining it. Current
practice has however prevailed over his authority. In
other words which can be declined in either way
without impropriety, those who prefer it can employ
the Greek form they will not be speaking Latin,
but will not on the other hand deserve censure. Simple words are what they are in the nominative, that is, their essential nature. Compound words are formed by the prefix of a preposition as
in innocens, though care must be taken that two
conflicting prepositions are not prefixed as in
imperterritus if this be avoided they may in certain
cases have a double prefix as in incompositus or
reconditus or the Ciceronian subabsurdtim. They may
also be formed by what I might term the combination of two independent units, as in maleficus. For I will not admit that the combination of three
is possible at any rate in Latin, although Cicero
asserts that capsis is compounded of cape si vis, and
there are to be found scholars who contend that
Lupercalia likewise is a compound of three parts of
speech, namely luere per caprum. As for Solitaurilia
it is by now universally believed to stand for
Suovelaurilia, a derivation which corresponds to the
actual sacrifice, which has its counterpart in Homer
as well. But these compounds are formed not so
much from three words as from the fragments of
three. On the other hand Pacuvius seems to have
formed compounds of a preposition and two vocables
i.e. nouns as in the effect is unpleasing. Compounds are however
formed from two complete Latin words, as for instance supefui and subterfui; though in this case
there is some question as to whether the words from
which they are formed are complete. They may
also be formed of one complete and one incomplete word, as in the case of malevolus, or of one incomplete and one complete, such as noctivagus, or of
two incomplete words as in pedisecus footman, or
from one Latin and one foreign word as in biclinium
a dining-couch for two, or in the reverse order
as in epitogium an upper garment or Anticato, and
sometimes even from two foreign words as in
epiraedium a thong attaching the horse to the raeda.
For in this last case the preposition is Greek, while
raeda is Gallic, while the compound is employed
neither by Greek nor Gaul, but has been appropriated by Rome from the two foreign tongues. In
the case of prepositions they are frequently changed
by the act of compounding as a result we get
abstulit, aufugit, amisit, though the preposition is ab,
and coil, though the preposition is con. The same is
true of ignauus and erepublica. But compounds are
better suited to Greek than to Latin, though I do
not think that this is due to the nature of our
language the reason rather is that we have a
preference for foreign goods, and therefore receive with applause, whereas we can scarce
defend incurvicervicus from derisive laughter. Words are proper when they bear their original
meaning; metaphorical, when they are used in a
sense different from their natural meaning. Current
words are safest to use there is a spice of danger in
coining new. For if they are adopted, our style
wins but small glory from them; while if they are
rejected, they become a subject for jest. Still we
must make the venture; for as Cicero says, use
softens even these words which at first seemed harsh.
On the other hand the power of onomatopoeia is denied
us. Who would tolerate an attempt to imitate phrases like the much praised and  We should even feel some qualms about
using balare and hinntre, if
we had not the sanction of antiquity to support us. 