I will speak of the theory of declamation a
little later. In the mean time, as we are discussing
the elementary stages of a rhetorical education, I
think I should not fail to point out how greatly the
rhetorician will contribute to his pupils' progress, if
he imitates the teacher of literature whose duty it is
to expound the poets, and gives the pupils whom he
has undertaken to train, instruction in the reading
of history and still more of the orators. I myself
have adopted this practice for the benefit of a few
pupils of suitable age whose parents thought it
would be useful. But though my intentions were
excellent, I found that there were two serious obstacles to success long custom had established a
different method of teaching, and my pupils were
for the most part full-grown youths who did not
require this form of teaching, but were taking my
work as their model. However, the fact that I
have been somewhat late in making the discovery is
not a reason why I should be ashamed to recommend
it to those who come after me. I now know that this
form of teaching is practised by the Greeks, but is
generally entrusted to assistants, as the professors
themselves consider that they have no time to give
individual instruction to each pupil as he reads. And I admit that the form of lecture which this
requires, designed as it is to make boys follow the
written word with ease and accuracy, and even that
which aims at teaching the meaning of any rare
words that may occur, are to be regarded as quite
below the dignity of the teacher of rhetoric. On
the other hand it is emphatically part of his prosession and the undertaking which he makes in
offering himself as a teacher of eloquence, to point
out the merits of authors or, for that matter, any
faults that may occur and this is all the more the
case, as I am not asking teachers to undertake the
task of recalling their pupils to standat their knee once
more and of assisting them in the reading of whatever book they may select. It seems to me at once
an easier and more profitable method to call for
silence and choose some one pupiland it will be
best to select them by turnsto read aloud, in
order that they may at the same time learn the
correct method of elocution. The case with which
the speech selected for reading is concerned should
then be explained, for if this be done they will
have a clearer understanding of what is to be read.
When the reading is commenced, no important
point should be allowed to pass unnoticed either
as regards the resourcefulness or the style shown
in the treatment of the subject the teacher must
point out how the orator seeks to win the favour
of the judge in his exordium, what clearness, brevity
and sincerity, and at times what shrewd design and
well-concealed artifice is shown in the statement of
facts. For the only true art in pleading is that
which can only be understood by one who is a
master of the art himself. The teacher will proceed
further to demonstrate what skill is shown in the division into heads, how subtle and frequent are the thrusts
of argument, what vigour marks the stirring and
what charm the soothing passage, how fierce is the
invective and how full of wit the jests, and in
conclusion how the orator establishes his sway
over the emotions of his audience, forces his way into their very hearts and brings the feelings of the
jury into perfect sympathy with all his words. Finally as regards the style, he will emphasise the
appropriateness, elegance or sublimity of particular
words, will indicate where the amplification of the
theme is deserving of praise and where there is
virtue in a diminuendo; and will call attention to
brilliant metaphors, figures of speech and passages
combining smoothness and polish with a general
impression of manly vigour. It will even at times be of value to read speeches
which are corrupt and faulty in style, but still meet
with general admiration thanks to the perversity of
modern tastes, and to point out how many expressions in them are inappropriate, obscure, high-flown,
grovelling, mean, extravagant or effeminate, although
they are not merely praised by the majority of critics,
but, worse still, praised just because they are bad. For
we have come to regard direct and natural speech
as incompatible with genius, while all that is in any
way abnormal is admired as exquisite. Similarly we
see that some people place a higher value on figures
which are in any way monstrous or distorted than
they do on those who have not lost any of the advantages of the normal form of man. There are
even some who are captivated by the shams of artifice
and think that there is more beauty in those who
pluck out superfluous hair or use depilatories, who
dress their locks by scorching them with the curling
iron and glow with a complexion that is not their
own, than can ever be conferred by nature pure and
simple, so that it really seems as if physical beauty
depended entirely on moral hideousness. It will, however, be the duty of the rhetorician not merely to teach these things, but to ask frequent
questions as well, and test the critical powers of his
class. This will prevent his audience from becoming
inattentive and will secure that his words do not fall
on deaf ears. At the same time the class will be led
to find out things for themselves and to use their
intelligence, which is after all the chief aim of this
method of training. For what else is our object in
teaching, save that our pupils should not always
require to be taught I will venture to say that
this particular form of exercise, if diligently pursued,
will teach learners more than all the text-books of
all the rhetoricians these are no doubt of very
considerable use, but being somewhat general in
their scope, it is quite impossible for them to deal
with all the special cases that are of almost daily
occurrence. The art of war will provide a parallel
it is no doubt based on certain general principles,
but it will none the less be far more useful to know
the methods employed, whether wisely or the reverse, by individual generals under varying circumstances and conditions of time and place. For there
are no subjects in which, as a rule, practice is not
more valuable than precept. Is a teacher to declaim
to provide a model for his audience, and will not
more profit be derived from the reading of Cicero or
Demosthenes Is a pupil to be publicly corrected
if he makes a mistake in declaiming, and will it not
be more useful, and more agreeable too, to correct
some actual speech For everyone has a preference
for hearing the faults of others censured rather than
his own. I might say more on the subject. But
every one can see the advantages of this method.
Would that the reluctance to put it into practice were not as great as the pleasure that would undoubtedly be derived from so doing This method once adopted, we are faced by the
comparatively easy question as to what authors
should be selected for our reading. Some have recommended authors of inferior merit on the ground
that they were easier to understand. Others on the
contrary would select the more florid school of writers
on the ground that they are likely to provide the
nourishment best suited to the minds of the young. For my part I would have them read the best authors
from the very beginning and never leave them,
choosing those, however, who are simplest and most
intelligible. For instance, when prescribing for boys,
I should give Livy the preference over Sallust;
for, although the latter is the greater historian,
one requires to be well-advanced in one's studies
to appreciate him properly. Cicero, in my opinion,
provides pleasant reading for beginners and is sufficiently easy to understand it is possible not only
to learn much from him, but to come to love him.
After Cicero I should, following the advice of Livy,
place such authors as most nearly resemble him. There are two faults of taste against which boys
should be guarded with the utmost care. Firstly
no teacher suffering from an excessive admiration
of antiquity, should be allowed to cramp their
minds by the study of Cato and the Gracchi and
other similar authors. For such reading will give
them a harsh and bloodless style, since they will as
yet be unable to understand the force and vigour of
these authors, and contenting themselves with a
style which doubtless was admirable in its day, but
is quite unsuitable to ours, will come to think and nothing could be more fatal that they really resemble great men. Secondly the opposite extreme must
be equally avoided they must not be permitted to
fall victims to the pernicious allurements of the
precious blooms produced by our modern euphuists,
thus acquiring a passion for the luscious sweetness
of such authors, whose charm is all the more attractive to boyish intellects because it is so easy of
achievement. Once, however, the judgment is
formed and out of danger of perversion, I should
strongly recommend the reading of ancient authors,
since if, after clearing away all the uncouthness of
those rude ages, we succeed in absorbing the robust
vigour and virility of their native genius, our more
finished style will shine with an added grace
I also approve the study of the moderns at
this stage, since even they have many merits. For nature has not doomed us to be dullards,
but we have altered our style of oratory and indulged our caprices over much. It is in their ideals
rather than their talents that the ancients show
themselves our superiors. It will therefore be
possible to select much that is valuable from modern
writers, but we must take care that the precious
metal is not debased by the dross with which it is
so closely intermingled. Further I would not
merely gladly admit, but would even contend that
we have recently had and still have certain authors
who deserve imitation in their entirety. But it is
not for everyone to decide who these writers are.
Error in the choice of earlier authors is attended
with less danger, and I have therefore postponed
the study of the moderns, for fear that we should
imitate them before we are qualified to judge of
their merits. 