When our orator has developed his strength
to such a pitch that it is equal to every kind of confact in which he may be called upon to bear his part,
his first consideration should be to exercise care in
the choice of the cases which he proposes to undertake. A good man will undoubtedly prefer defence
to prosecution, but he will not have such a rooted
objection to the task of accuser as to disregard his
duty towards the state or towards individuals and
refuse to call any man to render an account of his
way of life. For the laws themselves would be
powerless without the assistance of advocates equal
to the task of supporting them; and to regard it as a
sin to demand the punishment of crime is almost equivalent to the sanctioning of crime, while it is certainly
contrary to the interest of the good to give the
wicked free leave to work their will. Therefore, our
orator will not suffer the complaints of our allies, the
death of friends or kinsmen, or conspiracies that
threaten the common weal to go unavenged, while
his conduct will be governed not by a passion to
secure the punishment of the guilty, but by the desire to correct vice and reform morals. For fear
is the only means of restraining those who cannot
be led to better ways by the voice of reason. Consequently, while to devote one's life to the task of
accusation, and to be tempted by the hope of reward
to bring the guilty to trial is little better than making
one's living by highway robbery, none the less to rid
one's country of the pests that gnaw its vitals is
conduct worthy of comparison with that of heroes,
who champion their country's cause in the field of
battle. For this reason men who were leaders of the
state have not refused to undertake this portion of
an orator's duty, and even young men of high rank
have been regarded as giving their country a pledge
of their devotion by accusing bad citizens, since it
was thought that their hatred of evil and their
readiness to incur enmity were proofs of their confidence in their own rectitude. Such action was
taken by Hortensius, the Luculli, Sulpicius, Cicero,
Caesar and many others, among them both the Catos,
of whom one was actually called the Wise, while if
the other is not regarded as wise, I do not know of
any that can claim the title after him. On the other
hand, this same orator of ours will not defend all and
sundry that haven of safety which his eloquence
provides will never be opened to pirates as it is to
others, and he will be led to undertake cases mainly
by consideration of their nature. However, since
one man cannot undertake the cases of all litigants
who are not, as many undoubtedly are, dishonest, he
will be influenced to some extent by the character
of the persons who recommend clients to his protection and also by the character of the litigants
themselves, and will allow himself to be moved by the wishes of all virtuous men; for a good man will
naturally have such for his most intimate friends.
But he must put away from him two kinds of
pretentious display, the one consisting in the
officious proffering of his services to the powerful
against those of meaner position, and the other,
which is even more obtrusive, in deliberately supporting inferiors against those of high degree. For a
case is not rendered either just or the reverse by the
social position of the parties engaged. Nor, again,
will a sense of shame deter him from throwing over
a case which he has undertaken in the belief that it
had justice on its side, but which his study of the
facts has shown to be unjust, although before doing
so he should give his client his true opinion on the
case. For, if we judge aright, there is no greater
benefit that we can confer on our clients than this,
that we should not cheat them by giving them empty
hopes of success. On the other hand, no client that
does not take his advocate into his counsel deserves
that advocate's assistance, and it is certainly unworthy
of our ideal orator that he should wittingly defend
injustice. For if he is led to defend what is false
by any of the motives which I mentioned above, his
own action will still be honourable. It is an open question whether he should never
demand a fee for his services. To decide the
question at first sight would be the act of a fool.
For we all know that by far the most honourable
course, and the one which is most in keeping with a
liberal education and that temper of mind which we
desiderate, is not to sell our services nor to debase
the value of such a boon as eloquence, since there
are not a few things which come to be regarded as cheap, merely because they have a price set upon
them. This much even the blind can see, as the
saying is, and no one who is the possessor of sufficient
wealth to satisfy his needs and that does not imply
any great opulence will seek to secure an income
by such methods without laying himself open to the
charge of meanness. On the other hand, if his
domestic circumstances are such as to require some
addition to his income to enable him to meet the
necessary demands upon his purse, there is not a
philosopher who would forbid him to accept this form
of recompense for his services, since collections were
made even on behalf of Socrates, and Zeno, Cleanthes
and Chrysippus took fees from their pupils. Nor
can I see how we can turn a more honest penny than
by performance of the most honourable of tasks and
by accepting money from those to whom we have
rendered the most signal services and who, if they
made no return for what we have done for them,
would show themselves undeserving to have been
defended by us. Nay, it is not only just, but
necessary that this should be so, since the duties of
advocacy and the bestowal of every minute of our
time on the affairs of others deprive us of all other
means of making money. But we must none the
less observe the happy mean, and it makes no small
difference from whom we take payment, what payment we demand, and how long we continue to do
so. As for the piratical practice of bargaining and
the scandalous traffic of those who proportion their
fees to the peril in which their would-be client
stands, such a procedure will be eschewed even by
those who are more than half scoundrels, more
especially since the advocate who devotes himself to the defence of good men and worthy causes will
have nothing to fear from ingratitude. And even if
a client should prove ungrateful, it is better that he
should be the sinner and not our orator. To conelude, then, the orator will not seek to make more
money than is sufficient for his needs, and even if he
is poor, he will not regard his payment as a fee, but
rather as the expression of the principle that one
good turn deserves another, since he will be well
aware that he has conferred far more than he receives.
For it does not follow that because his services
ought not to be sold, they should therefore be
unremunerated. Finally, gratitude is primarily the
business of the debtor. 