In my last book I spoke of tropes. I now come
tofigures, called in Greek, a topic which is
naturally and closely connected with the preceding.
For many authors have considered figures identical
with tropes, because whether it be that the latter
derive their name from having a certain form or from
the fact that they effect alterations in language a
view which has also led to their being styled motions,
it must be admitted that both these features are
found in figures as well. Their employment is also
the same. For they add force and charm to our
matter. There are some again who call tropes figures,
Artorius Proculus among them. Further the resemblance between the two is so close that it is not easy
to distinguish between them. For although certain
kinds differ, while retaining a general resemblance
since both involve a departure from the simple and
straightforward method of expression coupled with
a certain rhetorical excellence, on the other hand
some are distinguished by the narrowest possible
dividing line for example, while irony belongs to
figures of thought just as much as to tropes,  periphrasis,
hyperbaton and onomatopoea have been ranked by
distinguished authors as figures of speech rather than
tropes. It is therefore all the more necessary to point out
the distinction between the two. The name of trope is applied to the transference of expressions from
their natural and principal signification to another,
with a view to the embellishment of style or, as the
majority of grammarians define it, the transference
of words and phrases from the place which is strictly
theirs to another to which they do not properly
belong. A figure, on the other hand, as is clear from
the name itself, is the term employed when we give
our language a conformation other than the obvious
and ordinary. Therefore the substitution of one
word for another is placed among tropes, as for
example in the case of metaphor, metonymy, antonomasia, metalepsis, synecdoch, catachresis, allegory and,
as a rule, hyperbole, which may, of course, be concerned either with words or things. Onomatopoea is
the creation of a word and therefore involves substitution for the words which we should use but
for such creation. Again although periphrasis often
includes the actual word whose place it supplies, it
still uses a number of words in place of one. The
epithet as a rule involves an element of antonomasia
and consequently becomes a trope on account of this
affinity. Hyperbaton is a change of order and for
this reason many exclude it from tropes. None the
less it transfers a word or part of a word from its
own place to another. None of these can be called
figures. For a figure does not necessarily involve
any alteration either of the order or the strict sense
of words. As regards irony, I shall show elsewhere
how in some of its forms it is a trope, in others a
figure. For I admit that the name is common to
both and am aware of the complicated and minute
discussions to which it has given rise. They, however, have no bearing on my present task. For it makes no difference by which name either is called, so
long as its stylistic value is apparent, since the meaning of things is not altered by a change of name.
For just as men remain the same, even though they
adopt a new name, so these artifices will produce
exactly the same effect, whether they are styled
tropes or figures, since their values lie not in their
names, but in their effect. Similarly it makes no
difference whether we call a basis conjectural or
negative, or concerned with fact or substance, provided always that we know that the subject of
enquiry is the same. It is best therefore in dealing
with these topics to adopt the generally accepted
terms and to understand the actual thing, by whatever name it is called. But we must note the fact
that trope and figure are often combined in the
expression of the same thought, since figures are
introduced just as much by the metaphorical as by
the literal use of words. There is, however, a considerable difference of
opinion among authors as to the meaning of the
name, the number of genera and the nature and
number of the species into which figures may be
divided. The first point for consideration is, therefore, what is meant by a figure. For the term is
used in two senses. In the first it is applied to any
form in which thought is expressed, just as it is to
bodies which, whatever their composition, must have
some shape. In the second and special sense, in
which it is called a schema, it means a rational change
in meaning or language from the ordinary and simple
form, that is to say, a change analogous to that
involved by sitting, lying down on something or
looking back. Consequently when a student tends to continuous or at any rate excessive use of the
same cases, tenses, rhythms or even feet, we are in
the habit of instructing him to vary his figures with
a view to the avoidance of monotony. In so doing
we speak as if every kind of language possessed a
figure for example cursitare and lectitare are said
to have the same figure, that is to say, they are
identical in formation. Therefore in the first and
common sense of the word everything is expressed
by figures. If we are content with this view, there
is good reason for the opinion expressed by Apollodorus if we may trust the statement of Caecilius on
this point to the effect that he found the rules laid
down in this connexion quite incomprehensible. If,
on the other hand, the name is to be applied to
certain attitudes, or I might say gestures of language,
we must interpret schema in the sense of that which
is poetically or rhetorically altered from the simple
and obvious method of expression. It will then be
true to distinguish between the style which is devoid
of figures or  and that which is adorned
with figures or . But Zoilus narrowed
down the definition, since he restricted the term
schema to cases when the speaker pretends to say
something other than that which he actually does
say. 1 know that this view meets with common
acceptance it is, in fact, for this reason that we speak
of figured controversial themes, of which I shall
shortly speak. We shall then take a figure to mean
a form of expression to which a new aspect is given
by art. Some writers have held that there is only one
kind of figure, although they differ as regards the
reasons which lead them to adopt this view. For some of them, on the ground that a change of words
causes a corresponding change in the sense, assert
that all figures are concerned with words, while others
hold that figures are concerned solely with the sense,
on the ground that words are adapted to things.
Both these views are obviously quibbling. For the
same things are often put in different ways and
the sense remains unaltered though the words are
changed, while a figure of thought may include several
figures of speech. For the former lies in the conception, the latter in the expression of our thought.
The two are frequently combined, however, as in
the following passage  for
the device by which he turns from the judges to
Dolabella is a figure of thought, while iam iam  
and liberum  are figures of speech. It is, however, to the best of my knowledge,
generally agreed by the majority of authors that
there are two classes of figure, namely figures of
thought, that is of the mind, feeling or conceptions,
since all these terms are used, and figures of speech,
that is of words, diction, expression, language or
style the name by which they are known varies,
but mere terminology is a matter of indifference.
Cornelius Celsus, however, to figures of thought and
speech would add those produced by ; but
he has merely been led astray by an excessive passion
for novelty. For who can suppose that so learned
a man was ignorant of the fact that and both come under the heading of
thought We may therefore conclude that, like
language itself, figures are necessarily concerned with
thought and with words. As, however, in the natural course of things we
conceive ideas before we express them, I must take
figures of thought first. Their utility is at once great
and manifold, and is revealed with the utmost clearness in every product of oratory. For although it
may seem that proof is infinitesimally affected by
the figures employed, none the less those same figures
lend credibility to our arguments and steal their
way secretly into the minds of the judges. For just
as in sword-play it is easy to see, parry, and ward off'
direct blows and simple and straightforward thrusts,
while side-strokes and feints are less easy to observe
and the task of the skilful swordsman is to give the
impression that his design is quite other than it
actually is, even so the oratory in which there is
no guile fights by sheer weight and impetus alone;
on the other hand, the fighter who feints and varies
his assault is able to attack flank or back as he will,
to lure his opponent's weapons from their guard and
to outwit him by a slight inclination of the body.
Further, there is no more effective method of exciting
the emotions than an apt use of figures. For if the
expression of brow, eyes and hands has a powerful
effect in stirring the passions, how much more
effective must be the aspect of our style itself when
composed to produce the result at which we aim
But, above all, figures serve to commend what we
say to those that hear us, whether we seek to win
approval for our character as pleaders, or to win
favour for the cause which we plead, to relieve
monotony by variation of our language, or to indicate
our meaning in the safest or most seemly way. But before I proceed to demonstrate what figures
best suit the different circumstances, I must point out that their number is far from being as
great as some authorities make out. For I am not
in the least disturbed by the various names which
the Greeks more especially are so fond of inventing.
First of all, then, I must repudiate the views of those
who hold that there are as many types of figure
as there are kinds of emotion, on the ground, not
that emotions are not qualities of the mind, but that
a figure, in its strict, not its general sense, is not
simply the expression of anything you choose to
select. Consequently the expression in words of
anger, grief, pity, fear, confidence or contempt is
not a figure, any more than persuasion, threats,
entreaty or excuse. But superficial observers are
deceived by the fact that they find figures in all
passages dealing with such themes, and select
examples of them from speeches; whereas in reality
there is no department of oratory which does not
admit such figures. But it is one thing to admit
igt;figure and another to be a figure; I am not going
to be frightened out of repeating the term with some
frequency in my attempt to make the facts clear.
My opponents will, I know, direct my attention to
special figures employed in expressing anger, in
entreating for mercy, or appealing to pity, but it
does not follow that expressions of anger, appeals
to pity or entreaties for mercy are in themselves
figures. Cicero, it is true, includes all ornaments of
oratory under this head, and in so doing adopts, as
it seems to me, a middle course. For he does not
hold that all forms of expression are to be regarded
as figures, nor, on the other hand, would he restrict
the term merely to those expressions whose form
varies from ordinary use. But he regards as figurative all those expressions which are especially
striking and most effective in stirring the emotions
of the audience. He sets forth this view in two of
his works, and that my readers may have the
opportunity of realising the judgment of so high
an authority, I subjoin what he says verbatim. In the third book of the de Oratore we find the
following words Most of these statements are repeated by Cicero
in the Orator, but not all, while his language is
somewhat more precise, since after dealing with
figures of speech and of thought he adds a third
section, concerned, as he himself says, with the other
excellences of style. 