Having stated the rules which we must
follow in speaking, I will now proceed to lay down
the rules which must be observed when we write.
Such rules are called orthography by the Greeks; let
us style it the science of writing correctly. This
science does not consist merely in the knowledge of
the letters composing each syllable such a study
is beneath the dignity of a teacher of grammar,
but, in my opinion, develops all its subtlety in connexion with doubtful points. For instance, while it
is absurd to place a circumflex over all long syllables
since the quantity of most syllables is obvious from
the very nature of the word which is written, it is
all the same occasionally necessary, since the same
letter involves a different meaning according as it is
long or short. For example we determine whether
mains is to mean an or a by
the use of the circumflex; palus means a if
the first syllable is long, a if it be short;
again when the same letter is short in the nominative
and long in the ablative, we generally require the
circumflex to make it clear which quantity to understand. Similarly it has been held that we should
observe distinctions such as the following if the
preposition ex is compounded with specto, there will
be an s in the second syllable, while there will be no
s if it is compounded with pecto. Again the following distinction has frequently been observed ad is
spelt with a d when it is a preposition, but with a t
when it is a conjunction, while cum is spelt quum
when it denotes time, but cum when it denotes
accompaniment. Still more pedantic are the practices
of making the fourth letter of quidquid a c to avoid
the appearance of repeating a question, and of writing quotidie instead of colidie to show that it stands for
quot diebus. But such practices have disappeared
into the limbo of absurdities. It is often debated whether in our spelling of
prepositions we should be guided by their sound
when compounded, or separate. For instance when
I say optinuit, logic demands that the second
letter should be a b, while to the ear the sound is
rather that of p or again take the case of immunis the letter n, which is required by strict adherence to
fact, is forced by the sound of the m. which follows
to change into another m. We must also note when
analysing compound words, whether the middle
consonant adheres to the preceding syllable or to
that which follows. For example since the latter
part of haruspex is from spectare, the s must be
assigned to the third syllable. In abstemius on the
other hand it will go with the first syllable since the
word is derived from abstinentia temeti, As for k my view is that it should not
be used at all except in such words as may be indicated by the letter standing alone as an abbreviation.
I mention the fact because some hold that k should
be used whenever the next letter is an a, despite
the existence of the letter c which maintains its
force in conjunction with all the vowels. Orthography, however, is also the servant of usage
and therefore undergoes frequent change. I make
no mention of the earliest times when our alphabet
contained fewer letters and their shapes differed
from those which we now use, while their values also
were different. For instance in Greek the letter o
was sometimes long and short, as it is with us, and
again was sometimes used to express the syllable which is identical with its name. And in Latin
ancient writers ended a number of words with d, as
may be seen on the column adorned with the beaks
of ships, which was set up in the forum in honour
of Duilius. Sometimes again they gave words a
final g, as we may still see in the shrine of the Sun,
close to the temple of Quirinus, where we find the
word uesperug, which we write uesperugo evening
star. I have already spoken of the interchange
of letters and need not repeat my remarks here
perhaps their pronunciation corresponded with their
spelling. For a long time the doubling of semivowels was avoided, while down to the time of
Accius and beyond, long syllables were indicated by
repetition of the vowel. The practice of joining e
and i as in the Greek diphthong lasted longer it
served to distinguish cases and numbers, for which
we may compare the instructions of Lucilius But this addition of e is quite superfluous, since t
can be long no less than short it is also at times
inconvenient. For in those words which end in i
and have e as their last letter but one, we shall on
this principle have to write e twice I refer to words
such as aurei or argentei and the like. Now such a
practice will be an actual hindrance to those who are
learning to read. This difficulty occurs in Greek as well in connexion with the addition of an iota, which
is employed not merely in the termination of the
dative, but is sometimes found in the middle of
words as in for the reason that the analysis
applied by etymology shows the word to be a trisyllable and requires the addition of that letter.
The diphthong ae now written with an e, was pronounced in old days as ai; some wrote ai in all cases,
as in Greek, others confined its use to the dative and
genitive singular; whence it comes that Vergil,
always a passionate lover of antiquity, inserted pictai
uestis and aquai in his poems. But in the plural they
used e and wrote Syllae, Galbae. Lucilius has given
instructions on this point also; his instructions
occupy quite a number of verses, for which the
incredulous may consult his ninth book. Again in
Cicero's days and a little later, it was the almost
universal practice to write a double s, whenever that
letter occurred between two long vowels or after a
long vowel, as for example in caussae, cassus, diuissiones.
That he and Vergil both used this spelling is shown
by their own autograph manuscripts. And yet at
a slightly earlier date iussi which we write with a
double s was spelt with only one. Further optimnus
maximus, which older writers spelt with a u, appear for the first time with an i such at any rate
is the tradition in an inscription of Gaius Caesar. We now write here, but I still find in manuscripts of
the old comic poets phrases such as heri ad me uenit,
and the same spelling is found in letters of Augustus
written or corrected by his own hand. Again did
not Cato the censor spell dicam and faciam as dicem and faciem and observe the same practice in words of
similar termination This is clear from old manuscripts of his works and is recorded by Messala in
his treatise on the letter s. Sibe and quase are found
in many books, but I cannot say whether the
authors wished them to be spelt thus I learn from
Pedianus that Livy, whose precedent he himself
adopted, used this spelling to-day we make these
words end with an i. What shall I say of uorlices,
uorsus and the like, which Scipio Africanus is said
to have been the first to spell with an e My own
teachers spelt seruus and ceruus with a uo, in order
that the repetition of the vowel might not lead to
the coalescence and confusion of the two sounds
to-day however we write these words with a double
u on the principle which I have already stated
neither spelling however exactly expresses the pronunciation. It was not without reason that Claudius
introduced the Aeolic digamma to represent this
sound. It is a distinct improvement that to-day we
spell cui as I have written it when I was a boy it
used to be spelt quoi, giving it a very full sound,
merely to distinguish it from qui. Again, what of words whose spelling is at variance
with their pronunciation For instance C is used as
an abbreviation for Gaius, and when inverted stands
for a woman, for as we know from the words of the
marriage service women used to be called Gaiae,
just as men were called Gaii. Gnaeus too in the
abbreviation indicating the praenomen is spelt in a
manner which does not agree with its pronunciation.
We also find columnas and consul spelt without an n, while Subura when indicated by three letters is spelt
Suc. I could quote many other examples of this,
but I fear that I have already said too much on so
trivial a theme. On all such subjects the teacher must use his own
judgment; for in such matters it should be the
supreme authority. For my own part, I think that,
within the limits prescribed by usage, words should
be spelt as they are pronounced. For the use of
letters is to preserve the sound of words and to
deliver them to readers as a sacred trust consequently they ought to represent the pronunciation
which we are to use. These are the more important
points in connexion with writing and speaking
correctly. I do not go so far as to deny to the
teacher of literature all part in the two remaining departments of speaking and writing with
elegance and significance, but I reserve these for a
more important portion of this work, as I have still
to deal with the duties of the teacher of rhetoric. I am however haunted by the thought that some
readers will regard what I have said as trivial details
which are only likely to prove a hindrance to those
who are intent upon a greater task; and I myself
do not think that we should go so far as to lose our
sleep of nights or quibble like fools over such
minutiae; for such studies make mincemeat of the
mind. But it is only the superfluities of grammar
that do any harm. I ask you, is Cicero a less great
orator for having given this science his diligent
attention or for having, as his letters show, demanded
rigid correctness of speech from his son Or was the
vigour of Gaius Caesar's eloquence impaired by the
publication of a treatise on Analogy Or the polish of Messala dimmed by the fact that he devoted
whole books to the discussion not merely of
single words, but of single letters Such studies do
no harm to those who but pass through them it is
only the pedantic stickler who suffers. 