The art of oratory, as taught by most authorities, and those the best, consists of five parts-
invention, arrangement, expression, memory, and delivery
or action the two latter terms being used synonymously. But all speech expressive of purpose involves
also a subject and words. If such expression is brief and contained within the limits of one sentence, it
may demand nothing more, but longer speeches
require much more. For not only what we say
and how we say it is of importance, but also
the circumstances under which we say it. It is here
that the need of arrangement comes in. But it will
be impossible to say everything demanded by the
subject, putting each thing in its proper place, without
the aid of memory. It is for this reason that memory
forms the fourth department. But a delivery, which
is rendered unbecoming cither by voice or gesture,
spoils everything and almost entirely destroys the
effect of what is said. Delivery therefore must be
assigned the fifth place. Those and Albutins is among them, who maintain
that there are only three departments on the ground
that memory and delivery for which I shall give
instructions in their proper place are given us by
nature not by art, may be disregarded, although
Thrasymachus held the same views as regards delivery. Some have added a sixth department, subjoining judgment to invention, on the ground that it is
necessary first to invented and then to exercise our judgment. For my own part I do not believe that invention
can exist apart from judgement, since we do not say that a
speaker has invented incousistent, two-edged or foolish
arguments, but merely that he has failed to avoid
them. It is true that Cicero in his Rhetorica includes judgment under mention; but in my opinion
judgment is so inextricably mingled with the first
three departments of rhetoric for without judgment
neither expression nor arrangement are possible, that
I think that even delivery owes much to it. I say
this with all the greater confidence because Cicero in his Partitiones oratoriae arrives at the same five-fold
division of which I have just spoken. For after an
initial division of oratory into invention and expression,
he assigns matter and arrangement to invention, words
and delivery to expression, and makes memory a fifth
department common to them all and acting as their
guardian. Again in the Orator he states that eloquence consists of five things, and in view of the fact
that this is a later work we may accept this as his
more settled opinion. Others, who seem to me to
have been no less desirous than those mentioned
above to introduce some novelty, have added order,
although they had already mentioned arrangement,
as though arrangement was anything else than the
marshalling of arguments in the best possible order.
Dion taught that oratory consisted only of invention
and arrangement, but added that each of these departments was twofold in nature, being concerned with
words and things, so that expression comes under
invention, and delivery under arrangement, while memory
must be added as a fifth department. The followers
of Theodorus divide invention into two parts, the one
concerned with matter and the other with expression,
and then add the three remaining departments. Hermagoras places judgment, division, order and
everything relating to expression under the heading
of economy, a Greek word meaning the management
of domestic affairs which is applied metaphorically to
oratory and has no Latin equivalent. A further question arises at this point, since
some make memory follow invention in the list of
departments, while others make it follow arrangement.
Personally I prefer to place it fourth. For we ought
not merely to retain in our minds the fruits of our invention, in order that we may be able to arrange
them, or to remember our arraangement in order that
we may express it, but we must also commit to
memory the words which we propose to use, since
memory embraces everything that goes to the compposition of a speech. There are also not a few who have held that these
are not parts of rhetoric, but rather duties to be
observed by the orator. For it is his business to
invent, arrange, express, etcetera. If, however, we
accept this view, we leave nothing to art. For
although the orator's task is to speak well, rhetoric
is the science of speaking well. Or if we adopt
another view, the task of the artist is to persuade,
while the power of persuasion resides in the art.
Consequently, while it is the duty of the orator to
invent and arrange, intention and arrangement may be
regarded as belonging to rhetoric. At this point
there has been much disagreement, as to whether
these are parts or duties of rhetoric, or, as Athenaeus
believes, elements of rhetoric, which the Greeks call But they cannot correctly be called elements. For in that case we should have to regard
them merely as first-principles, like the moisture, fire,
matter or atoms of which the universe is said to be
composed. Nor is it correct to call them duties, since
they are not preformed by others, but perform something themselves. We must therefore conclude that
they are parts. For since rhetoric is composed of
them, it follows that, since a whole consists of parts,
these must be parts of the whole which they compose. Those who have called them duties seem to
me to have been further influenced by the fact that
they wished to reserve the name of parts for another division of rhetoric for they asserted that the parts
of rhetoric were, panegyric, deliberative and forensic
oratory. But if these are parts, they are parts rather
of the material than of the art. For each of them
contains the whole of rhetoric, since each of them
requires invention, arrangement, expression, memory and
delivery. Consequently some writers have thought
it better to say that there are three kinds of oratory;
those whom Cicero has followed seem to me to
have taken the wisest course in terming them kinds
of causes. 