My next task is to indicate what those should
write whose aim is to acquire facility. At this part
of my work there is no necessity for me to set forth
the subjects which should be selected for writing,
or the order in which they should be approached,
since I have already done this in the first book,
where I prescribed the sequence of studies for boys,
and in the second book, where I did the same for
young men. The point which concerns me now is
to show from what sources copiousness and facility
may most easily be derived. Our earlier orators thought highly of translation
from Greek into Latin. In the de Oratore of
Cicero, Lucius Crassus says that he practised this
continually, while Cicero himself advocates it again
and again, nay, he actually published translations
of Xenophon and Plato, which were the result of
this form of exercise. Messala likewise gave it his
approval, and we have a number of translations of
speeches from his hand; he even succeeded in
coping with the delicacy of Hyperides' speech in
defence of Phryne, a task of exceeding difficulty for
a Roman. The purpose of this form of exercise is
obvious. For Greek authors are conspicuous for the
variety of their matter, and there is much art in
all their eloquence, while, when we translate them,
we are at liberty to use the best words available, since all that we use are our very own. As regards
figures, too, which are the chief ornament of oratory,
it is necessary to think out a great number and variety
for ourselves, since in this respect the Roman idiom
differs largely from the Greek. But paraphrase from the Latin will also be of
much assistance, while I think we shall all agree that
this is specially valuable with regard to poetry;
indeed, it is said that the paraphrase of poetry was
the sole form of exercise employed by Sulpicius.
For the lofty inspiration of verse serves to elevate
the orator's style and the bold license of poetic
language does not preclude our attempting to
render the same words in the language natural to
prose. Nay, we may add the vigour of oratory
to the thoughts expressed by the poet, make good
his omissions, and prune his diffuseness. But I
would not have paraphrase restrict itself to the
bare interpretation of the original its duty is
rather to rival and vie with the original in the
expression of the same thoughts. Consequently,
I disagree with those who forbid the student to
parahrase speeches of our own orators, on the
ground that, since all the best expressions have
already been appropriated, whatever we express
differently must necessarily be a change for the
worse. For it is always possible that we may discover expressions which are an improvement on
those which have already been used, and nature
did not make eloquence such a poor and starveling
thing, that there should be only one adequate
expression for any one theme. It can hardly be
argued that, while the gestures of the actor are
capable of imparting a wealth of varied meaning to the same words, the power of oratory is restricted
to a narrower scope, so that when a thing has once
been said, it is impossible to say anything else on
the same theme. Why, even if it be granted that
no new expression we discover can be better than
or even equal to the old, it may, at any rate, be
a good second. Do we not often speak twice, or
even more frequently, on the same subject, sometimes even to the extent of a number of sentences
in succession It will scarce be asserted that we
must not match ourselves against others when
we are permitted to match ourselves against ourselves. For if there were only one way in which
anything could be satisfactorily expressed, we
should be justified in thinking that the path to
success had been sealed to us by our predecessors.
But, as a matter of fact, the methods of expression
still left us are innumerable, and many roads lead
us to the same goal. Brevity and copiousness each
have their own peculiar grace, the merits of metaphor are one thing and of literalness another, and,
while direct expression is most effective in one case,
in another the best result is gained by a use of
figures. Further, the exercise is valuable in virtue
of its difficulty; and again, there is no better way of
acquiring a thorough understanding of the greatest
authors. For, instead of hurriedly running a careless
eye over their writings, we handle each separate
phrase and are forced to give it close examination,
and we come to realise the greatness of their excellence from the very fact that we cannot imitate
them. Nor is it only the paraphrase of the works of
others that we shall find of advantage much may be gained from paraphrasing our own words in a
number of different ways for instance, we may
specially select certain thoughts and recast them
in the greatest variety of forms, just as a sculptor
will fashion a number of different images from the
same piece of wax. But it is the simplest subjects
which, in my opinion, will serve us best in our
attempt to acquire facility. For our lack of talent
may easily shelter itself behind the complicated
mass of detail presented by persons, cases, circumstances of time and place, words and deeds, since
the subjects which present themselves on all sides
are so many that it will always be possible to lay
hold of some one or other. True merit is revealed
by the power to expand what is naturally compressed, to amplify what is small, to lend variety
to sameness, charm to the commonplace, and to
say a quantity of good things about a very limited
number of subjects. For this purpose indefinite questions, of the kind
we call theses, will be found of the utmost service
in fact, Cicero still exercised himself upon such
themes after he had become the leading man in
the state. Akin to these are the proof or refutation of general statements. For such statements
are a kind of decree or rule, and whatever problem
may arise from the thing, may equally arise from the
decision passed upon the thing. Then there are
commonplaces, which, as we know, have often been
written by orators as a form of exercise. The man
who has practised himself in giving full treatment
to such simple and uncomplicated themes, will
assuredly find his fluency increased in those subjects
which admit of varied digression, and will be prepared to deal with any case that may confront him,
since all cases ultimately turn upon general questions. For what difference is there between the
special case where Cornelius, the tribune of the
people, is charged with reading the text of a proposed law, and the general question whether it is
lse-majest for a magistrate himself to read the
law which he proposes to the people; what does it
matter whether we have to decide whether Milo was
justified in killing Clodius, or whether it is justifiable to kill a man who has set an ambush for his
slayer, or a citizen whose existence is a danger to
the state, even though he has set no such ambush
What difference is there between the question
whether it was an honourable act on the part of
Cato to make over Marcia to Hortensius, or whether
such an action is becoming to a virtuous man It is
on the guilt or innocence of specific persons that
judgement is given, but it is on general principles
that the case ultimately rests. As for declamations
of the kind delivered in the schools of the rhetoricians, so long as they are in keeping with actual
life and resemble speeches, they are most profitable
to the student, not merely while he is still immature,
for the reason that they simultaneously exercise the
powers both of invention and arrangement, but even
when he has finished his education and acquired a
reputation in the courts. For they provide a richer
diet from which eloquence derives nourishment and
brilliance of complexion, and at the same time afford
a refreshing variety after the continuous fatigues
of forensic disputes. For the same reason, the wealth
of language that marks the historian should be from
time to time imported into portions of our written exercises, and we should indulge in the easy freedom of dialogue. Nay, it may even be advantageous
to amuse ourselves with the writing of verse, just as
athletes occasionally drop the severe regime of diet
and exercise to which they are subjected and refresh
themselves by taking a rest and indulging in more
dainty and agreeable viands. Indeed, in my opinion,
one of the reasons why Cicero was enabled to shed
such glory upon the art of speaking is to be found
in his excursions to such bypaths of study. For if
all our material was drawn solely from actions at
law, our eloquence must needs lose its gloss, our
limbs grow stiff, and the keen edge of the intellect
be blunted by its daily combats. But although those who find their practice in the
contests of forensic warfare derive fresh strength
and repair their forces by means of this rich fare of
eloquence, the young should not be kept too long at
these false semblances of reality, nor should they be
allowed to become so familiar with these empty
shadows that it is difficult for them to leave them
otherwise there is always the danger that, owing to
the seclusion in which they have almost grown
old, they will shrink in terror from the real perils
of public life, like men dazzled by the unfamiliar
sunlight. Indeed it is recorded that this fate
actually befell Marcus Porcius Latro, the first professor of rhetoric to make a name for himself; for
when, at the height of his fame in the schools, he was
called upon to plead a case in the forum, he put
forward the most earnest request that the court
should be transferred to some public hall. He was
so unaccustomed to speak in the open air that all his
eloquence seemed to reside within the compass of a roof and four walls. For this reason a young man
who has acquired a thorough knowledge from his
instructors of the methods of invention and style
which is not by any means an endless task, if those
instructors have the knowledge and the will to
teach, and who has also managed to obtain a
reasonable amount of practice in the art, should
follow the custom in vogue with our ancestors, and
select some one orator to follow and imitate. He
should attend as many trials as possible and be a
frequent spectator of the conflicts in which he is
destined to take part. Next he should write out
speeches of his own dealing either with the cases
which he has actually heard pleaded or with others,
provided always they be actual cases, and should
argue them from both sides, training himself with
the real weapons of his warfare, just as gladiators do
or as Brutus did in that speech in defence of Milo
which I have already mentioned. This is better
than writing replies to old speeches, as Cestius did
to Cicero's defence of Milo in spite of the fact that,
his knowledge being confined to what was said for
the defence, he could not have possessed sufficient
acquaintance with the other side of the case. The young man, however, whom his instructor has
compelled to be as realistic as possible in declamation,
and to deal with every class of subject, instead of
merely selecting the easiest and most attractive cases,
as is done at present, will thus qualify himself much
more rapidly for actual forensic practice. Under existing circumstances the practice of the principle which
I mentioned second is, as a rule, hampered by the
large size of the classes and the practice of allotting
certain days for recitation, to which must be added the contributory circumstance that the boys' parents
are more interested in the number of their sons'
recitations than their quality. But, as I think I said
in the first book, the really good teacher will not
burden himself with a larger number of pupils than
he can manage, and will prune any tendency to
excessive loquacity, limiting their remarks to the
actual points involved by the subject of the declamation and forbidding them to range, as some would
have them do, over every subject in heaven and
earth further, he will either extend the period
within which he insists on their speaking, or will
permit them to divide their themes into several
portions. The thorough treatment of one theme
will be more profitable than the sketchy and superficial treatment of a number of subjects. For the
latter practice has the result that nothing is put in
its proper place and that the opening of the declamation exceeds all reasonable bounds, since the
young orator crams all the flowers of eloquence
which belong to all the different portions of the
theme into that portion which he has to deliver,
and fearing to lose what should naturally come later,
introduces wild confusion into the earlier portions
of his speech. 