Every speech however consists at once of that
which is expressed and that which expresses, that is
to say of matter and words. Skill in speaking is
perfected by nature, art and practice, to which some
add a fourth department, namely imitation, which I
however prefer to include under art. There are also
three aims which the orator must always have in
view; he must instruct, move and charm his hearers.
This is a clearer division than that made by those
who divide the task of oratory into that which relates
to things and that which concerns the emotions, since both of these will not always be present in the
subjects which we shall have to treat. For some
themes are far from calling for any appeal to the
emotions, which, although room cannot always be
found for them, produce a most powerful effect
wherever they do succeed in forcing their way. The
best authorities hold that there are some things in
oratory which require proof and others which do not,
a view with which I agree. Some on the other hand,
as for instance Celsus, think that the orator will not
speak on any subject unless there is some question
involved in it; but the majority of writers on rhetoric
are against him, as is also the threefold division of
oratory, unless indeed to praise what is allowed to be
honourable and to denounce what is admittedly disgraceful are no part of an orator's duty. It is, however, universally agreed that all questions
must be concerned either with something that is
written or something that is not. Those concerned with
what is written are questions of law, those which concern what is not written are questions of fact. Hermagoras calls the latter rational questions, the former
legal questions, for so we may translate and Those who hold that every question concerns either things or words, mean much the same. It is also agreed that questions are either definite
or indefinite. Indefinite questions are those which may
be maintained or impugned without reference to
persons, time or place and the like. The Greeks call
them theses, Cicero propositions, others general questions
relating to civil life, others again questions suited for
philosophical discussion, while Athenaeus calls them
parts of a cause. Cicero distinguishes two kinds,
the one concerned with knowledge, the other with
action. Thus is a question of knowledge, while is a question of action. The
first involves three questions, whether a thing
is, what it is, and of what nature for all these
things may be unknown the second involves two,
how to obtain power and how to use it. Definite
questions involve facts, persons, time and the like.
The Greeks call them hypotheses, while we call them
causes. In these the whole question turns on persons and facts. An indefinite question is always the
more comprehensive, since it is from the indefinite
question that the definite is derived. I will illustrate
what I mean by an example. The question is indefinite; the question is definite, and consequently may be
regarded as a subject for a deliberative theme. But
even those which have no connexion with particular
persons are generally given a specific reference.
For instance the question is abstract,
whereas has a
specific reference. But in this latter case we may
say that a person is tacitly implied. For the
mention of a tyrant doubles the question, and
there is an implicit admission of time and quality;
but all the same you would scarcely be justified in
calling it a cause or definite question. Those questions which I have styled indefinite are also called
general if this is correct, we shall have to call definite
questions special questions. But in every special
question the general question is implicit, since the
genus is logically prior to the species. And perhaps
even in actual causes wherever the notion of quality
comes into question, there is a certain intrusion of the abstract. Does not
this raise the general question as to whether we
have the right to kill a man who lies in wait for us
What again of conjectures May not they be of a
general character, as for instance, or or As for definitions, everything that they contain is undoubtedly of a general
nature. There are some who hold that even those
questions which have reference to persons and particular cases may at times be called theses, provided
only they are put slightly differently for instance,
if Orestes be accused, we shall have a cause whereas
if it is put as question, namely it will be a thesis. To the same class
as this last belongs the question These persons distinguish a thesis from a cause as follows a
thesis is theoretical in character, while a cause has
relation to actual facts, since in the former case we
argue merely with a view to abstract truth, while in
the latter we have to deal with some particular act. Some, however, think that general questions are
useless to an orator, since no profit is to be derived
from proving that we ought to marry or to take
part in politics, if we are prevented from so doing
by age or ill health. But not all general questions
are liable to this kind of objection. For instance
questions such as or cannot
be countered in this way. Further in questions which have reference to a particular person, although
it is not sufficient merely to handle the general
question, we cannot arrive at any conclusion on
the special point until we have first discussed the
general question. For how is Cato to deliberate unless the
general question is first settled And how is he to deliberate unless it is
proved that it is the duty of Cato to marry There
are, however, certain books attributed to Hermagoras which support this erroneous opinion, though
whether the attribution is spurious or whether they
were written by another Hermagoras is an open
question. For they cannot possibly be by the
famous Hermagoras, who wrote so much that was
admirable on the art of rhetoric, since, as is clear
from the first book of the Rhetorica of Cicero, he
divided the material of rhetoric into theses and causes.
Cicero objects to this division, contends that theses
have nothing to do with an orator, and refers all
this class of questions to the philosophers. But
Cicero has relieved me of any feeling of shame
that I might have in controverting his opinion, since
he has not only expressed his disapproval of his Rhetorica, but in the Orator, the de Oratore and the
Topica instructs us to abstract such discussions
from particular persons and occasions, In all general
questions, however, the essential basis is the same as
in a cause or definite question. It is further
pointed out that there are some questions which concern while others have
a particular reference; an example of the former
will be the question of the
latter ; or again the
question whether a man is brave will illustrate the
first, while the question whether he is braver than
another will exemplify the second. Apollodorus defines a cause in the following terms
I quote the translation of his pupil Valgius or again He then defines a matter in the following terms
 A matter is a combination of persons, circumstances
of place and time, motives, means, incidents, acts,
instruments, speeches, the letter and the spirit of the
law. Let us then understand a cause in the sense of
the Greek hypothesis or subject, and a matter in the
sense of the Greek peristasis or collection of circumstances. But some, however, have defined a cause in
the same way that Apollodorus defines a matter.
Isocrates on the other hand defines a cause as some
definite question concerned with some point of civil affairs,
or a dispute in which definite persons are involved; while
Cicero uses the following words VI. Since every cause, then, has a certain essential
basis on which it rests, before I proceed to set forth
how each kind of cause should be handled, I think I should first examine a question that is common to all
of them, namely, what is meant by basis, whence it
is derived and how many and of what nature such
bases may be. Some, it is true, have thought that
they were peculiar merely to forensic themes, but
their ignorance will stand revealed when I have
treated of all three kinds of oratory. That which I
call the basis some style the constitution, others the
question, and others again that which may be inferred
from the question, while Theodorus calls it the most general head, to which everything
must be referred. These different names, however, all
mean the same thing, nor is it of the least importance
to students by what special name things are called,
as long as the thing itself is perfectly clear. The
Greeks call this essential basis a name which
they hold was not invented by Hermagoras, but
according to some was introduced by Naucrates, the
pupil of Isocrates, according to others by Zopyrus of
Clazomenae, although Aeschines in his speech against
Ctesiphon seems to employ the word, when he asks
the jury not to allow Demosthenes to be irrelevant
but to keep him to the stasis or basis of the case. The term seems to be derived from the fact that it
is on it that the first collision between the parties to
the dispute takes place, or that it forms the basis or
standing of the whole case. So much for the origin of
the name. Now for its nature. Some have defined
the basis as being the first conflict of the causes. The
idea is correct, but the expression is faulty. For the
essential basis is not the first conflict, which we may
represent by the clauses and It is rather the
kind of question which arises from the first conflict, which we may represent as follows. or It is clear
from these examples, that the first sort of question
depends on conjecture, the second on definition, and
that the contending parties rest their respective cases
on these points the bases of these questions will
therefore be of a conjectural or definitive character
respectively. Suppose it should be asserted that
sound is the conflict between two bodies, the statement would in my opinion be erroneous. For sound
is not the actual conflict, but a result of the conflict.
The error is, however, of small importance for the
sense is clear, whatever the expression. But this
trivial mistake has given rise to a very serious error
in the minds of those who have not understood what
was meant for on reading that the essential basis was
the first conflict, they immediately concluded that the
basis was always to be taken from the first question,
which is a grave mistake. For every question has
its basis, since every question is based on assertion by
one party and denial by another. But there are some
questions which form an essential part of causes, and
it is on these that we have to express an opinion;
while others are introduced from without and are,
strictly speaking, irrelevant, although they may
contribute something of a subsidiary nature to the
general contention. It is for this reason that there
are said to be several questions in one matter of
dispute. Of these questions it is often the most
trivial which occupies the first place. For it is a
frequent artifice to drop those points in which we
place least confidence, as soon as we have dealt with
them; sometimes we make a free gift of them to our opponents, while sometimes we are content to use
them as a step to arguments which are of greater
importance. A simple cause, however, although it
may be defended in various ways, cannot have more
than one point on which a decision has to be given,
and consequently the basis of the cause will be that
point which the orator sees to be the most important
for him to make and on which the judge sees that he
must fix all his attention. For it is on this that the
cause will stand or fall. On the other hand questions
may have more bases than one. A brief example
will show what I mean. When the accused says he
makes the basis one of quality; but when he adds he introduces an element of
conjecture. But denial of the facts is always the
stronger line of defence, and therefore I conceive the
basis to reside in that which I should say, if I were
confined to one single line of argument. We are
right therefore in speaking of the first conflict of
causes in contradistinction to the conflict of questions.
For instance in the first portion of his speech on
behalf of Rabirius Postumus Cicero contends that the
action cannot lie against a Roman knight, while in
the second he asserts that no money ever came into
his client's hands. Still I should say that the basis
was to be found in the latter as being the stronger of
the two. Again in the case of Milo I do not consider
that the conflict is raised by the opening questions, but
only when the orator devotes all his powers to prove that
Clodius lay in wait for Milo and was therefore rightly
killed. The point on which above all the orator must
make up his mind, even although he may be going to take up various lines of argument in support of his
case, is this what is it that he wishes most to impress
upon the mind of the judge But although this
should be the first point for his consideration, it does
not follow that it should be the first that he will make
in his actual speech. Others have thought that the basis lay in the first
point raised by the other side in its defence. Cicero
expresses this view in the following words This involves
a further question as to whether the basis can only be
determined by the defence. Cornelius Celsus is
strongly against this view, and asserts that the basis
is derived not from the denial of the charge, but from
him who affirms his proposition. Thus if the accused
denies that anyone has been killed, the basis will
originate with the accuser, because it is the latter
who desires to prove if on the other hand the
accused asserts that the homicide was justifiable, the
burden of proof has been transferred and the basis
will proceed from the accused and be affirmed by him.
I do not, however, agree. For the contrary is nearer
to the truth, that there is no point of dispute if the
defendant makes no reply, and that consequently the
basis originates with the defendant. But in my
opinion the origin of the basis varies and depends on
the circumstances of the individual case. For instance
in conjectural causes the affirmation may be regarded
as determining the basis, since conjecture is employed
by the plaintiff rather than the defendant, and consequently some have styled the basis originated
by the latter negative. Again in any syllogism
the whole of the reasoning proceeds from him who affirms. But on the other hand he who in such cases
denies appears to impose the burden of dealing with
such bases upon his opponent. For if he says he will force his opponent to make use of con-
jecture, and again, if he says he will force him to employ the syllogism. Therefore
we must admit that a basis can originate in denial.
All the same we are left with our previous conclusion
that the basis is determined in some cases by the
plaintiff, in some by the defendant. Suppose the
accuser to affirm that the accused is guilty of homicide if the accused denies the charge, it is he who
will determine the basis. Or again, if he admits that
he has killed a man, but states that the victim was
an adulterer and justifiably killed and we know that
the law permits homicide under these circumstances,
there is no matter in dispute, unless the accuser has
some answer to make. Suppose the accuser does
answer however and deny that the victim was guilty
of adultery, it will be the accuser that denies, and it
is by him that the basis is determined. The basis,
then, will originate in the first denial of facts, but
that denial is made by the accuser and not the
accused. Again the same question may make the
same person either accuser or accused. An individual who had performed before the praetor in his private gardens, but
had never been presented on the public stage, has
taken his seat in one of the fourteen rows. The
accuser of course affirms that he has exercised the
profession of an actor the accused denies that he has
exercised the profession. The question then arises as to the meaning of the If he is accused under the law regarding
the seats in the theatre, the denial will proceed from
the accused; if on the other hand he is turned out
of the theatre and demands compensation for assault,
the denial will be made by the accuser. The view
of the majority of writers on this subject will,
however, hold good in most cases. Some have evaded
these problems by saying that a basis is that which
emerges from affirmations and denials, such as or But let us see whether this is the basis
itself or rather that in which the basis is to be found.
Hermagoras calls a basis that which enables the
matter in question to be understood and to which the
proofs of the parties concerned will also be directed.
My own opinion has always been that, whereas there
are frequently different bases of questions in connexion
with a cause, the basis of the cause itself is its most
important point on which the whole matter turns.
If anyone prefers to call that the general question or
general head of the cause, I shall not quarrel with him,
any more than I have done hitherto if he produced
a different technical term to express the same thing,
although I know that whole volumes have been
written on such disputes. I prefer however to call
it the basis. There is the greatest possible disagreement among writers about this as about everything
else, but in this case as elsewhere they seem to me to
have been misled by a passion for saying something
different from their fellow-teachers. As a result
there is still no agreement as to the number and
names of bases, nor as to which are general and which
special. To begin with Aristotle lays down that there are
ten categories on which every question seems to turn. First there is which Plautus calls essence, the
only available translation under this category we inquire whether a thing is. Secondly there is quality,
the meaning of which is self-evident. Third comes
quantity, which was subdivided by later philosophers
as dealing with two questions as to magnitude and
number. Next relation, involving questions of competence and comparison. This is followed by when
and where. Then come doing, suffering and possessing, which for example are concerned with a person's being
armed or clothed. Lastly comes or position,
which means to be in a certain position, such for instance as being warm, standing or angry. Of these
categories the first four concern bases, the remainder
concern only certain topics for argument. Others
make the number of categories to be nine. Person,
involving questions concerning the mind, body or
external circumstances, which clearly has reference
to the means by which we establish conjecture or
quality. Time, or from which we get questions
such as whether a child is born a slave, if his mother
is delivered of him while assigned to her creditors.
Place, from which we get such disputes as to whether
it is permissible to kill a tyrant in a temple, or
whether one who has hidden himself at home can be
regarded as an exile. Then comes time in another
sense, called by the Greeks, by which they
refer to a period of time, such as summer or winter; under this heading come problems such as that about
the man who held high revel in a time of pestilence.
Action or to which they refer questions as to
whether an act was committed wittingly or unwittingly, by accident or under compulsion and the like.
Number, which falls under the category of quantity,
under which come questions such as whether the
state owes Thrasybulus thirty talents for ridding it of
the same number of tyrants. Cause, under which
heading come a large number of disputes, whenever
a fact is not denied, but the defence pleads that the
act was just and reasonable. or manner, which
is involved when a thing is said to have been done in
one way when it might have been done in another
under this category come cases of such as that of the
adulterer who is scourged with thongs or starved to
death. Opportunity for action, the meaning of which
is too obvious to need explanation or illustration
the Greeks however call it These
authorities like Aristotle hold that no question can
arise which does not come under one of these heads.
Some subtract two of them, namely number and opportunity, and substitute for what I have called action,
things, or in Greek I have thought it sufficient to notice these doctrines, for fear someone might
complain of their omission. Still I do not consider
that bases are sufficiently determined by these categories, nor that the latter cover every possible kind
of topic, as will be clear to any that read carefully
what I have to say on both points. For there will be
found to be many topics that are not covered by
these categories. I find it stated in many authors that some rhetoricians only recognise one kind of basis, the con- jectural. But they have not mentioned who these
rhetoricians are nor have I been able to discover.
They are however stated to have taken this view on
the ground that all our knowledge is a matter of
inference from indications. On this line of reasoning they might regard all bases as qualitative, because
we inquire into the nature of the subject in every
case. But the adoption of either view leads to inextricable confusion. Nor does it matter whether one
recognises only one kind of basis or none at all, if
all causes are of the same nature. Coniectura is derived from conicere because it
implies the concentration of the reason on the truth.
For this reason interpreters of dreams and all other
phenomena are called coniectores But
the conjectural basis has received more names than
one, as will appear in the sequel. Some have recognised only two bases. Archedemus for instance admits only the conjectural and
definitive and refuses to admit the qualitative, since
he held that questions of quality take the form of which he terms questions about identity and
difference. A different view was held by those who
likewise only admitted two bases, but made them
the negative and juridical. The negative basis is
identical with that which we call the conjectural, to
which some give the name of negative absolutely,
others only in part, these latter holding that conjecture is employed by the accuser, denial only by the
accused. The juridical is that known in Greek as But just as Archedemus would not
recognise the qualitative basis, so these reject the
definitive which they include in the juridical, holding that in these questions we have to enquire whether
it is just that the act with which the accused is
charged should be called sacrilege or theft or madness. Pamplihlus held this opinion but subdivided
quality into several different species. The majority
of later writers have classified bases as follows, involving however no more than a change of names
those dealing with ascertained facts and those
dealing with matters where there is a doubt. For
a thing must either be certain or uncertain if
it is uncertain, the basis will be conjectural; if
certain, it will be some one of the other bases. Apollodorus says the same thing when he states that
a question must either lie in things external, which give
play to conjecture, or in our own opinions the former
he calls the latter The same
is said by those who employ the terms and that is to say doubtful and presumptive, by this latter term meaning those facts which
are beyond a doubt. Theodorus agrees with them,
for he holds that the question is either as to whether
such and such a thing is really so, or is concerned
with the accidents of something which is an admitted
fact that is to say it is either or For in all these cases the first
basis is conjectural, while the second belongs to one
of the other classes. As for these other classes of
basis, Apollodorus holds that there are two, one concerned with quality and the other with the names of
things, that is to say a definitive basis. Theodorus
makes them four, concerned with existence, quality,
quantity and relation. There are some too who make
questions of identity and difference come under the
head of quality, others who place it under the head of definition. Posidonius divides them into two
classes, those concerned with words and those concerned with things. In the first case he thinks that
the question is whether a word has any meaning; if
so, what is its meaning, how many meanings has it,
and how does it come to mean what it means In
the latter case, we employ conjecture, which he calls or inference from perception, quality,
definition which he calls or rational inference, and relation. Hence also comes the division
into things written and unwritten. Even Cornelius
Celsus stated that there were two general bases, one
concerned with the question whether a thing is, the
other with the question of what kind it is. He included definition under the first of these, because
enquiry may equally be made as to whether sacrilege
has been committed, when a man denies that he
has stolen anything from a temple, and when he
admits that he has stolen private money from a
temple. He divides quality into fact and the letter
of the law. Under the head of the letter of the law he
places four classes, excluding questions of competence quantity and intention he places under the
head of conjecture. There is also another method of
dividing bases into two classes according to this
disputes are either about substance or quality, while
quality is treated either in its most general sense or
in its special senses. Substance is dealt with by conjecture for in enquiring into anything, we ask
whether it has been done, is being done, or is likely
to be done, and sometimes also consider its intention
this method is preferable to that adopted by those
who style the conjectural basis a basis of fact, as
though we only enquired into the past and what has actually been done. The consideration of quality
under its most general aspect rarely comes up in
the courts; I refer to questions such as With
regard to the special aspects of quality, questions
sometimes occur about some common term, such as
whether sacrilege has been committed when a man
has stolen private money from a temple, or about
some act with a definite name, when there is no
doubt either as to the commission or the nature of
the act. Under this heading come all questions
about what is honourable, just or expedient. These
bases are said to contain others as well, because
quantity is sometimes concerned with conjectural bases,
as in the question whether the sun is bigger than
the earth, and sometimes with qualitative bases, as in
the question what reward or punishment it would
be just to assign to some particular person, while
questions of competence undoubtedly are concerned
with quality, and definition with questions of competence. ratiocinative
basis or syllogism and the majority of questions dealing with the letter of the law and intention are based
on equity, with the exception that this last question
sometimes admits of conjecture as, for instance, concerning the intentions of the legislator ambiguity,
however, must always be explained by conjecture,
because as it is clear that the words admit of two
interpretations the only question is as to the
intention. A large number of writers recognise general bases;
Cicero adopts them in his Orator, and holds that
everything that can form the subject of dispute or
discussion is covered by the three questions, whether it is, what it is, and of what kind it is. The names
of these three bases are too obvious for mention.
The same view is asserted by Patrocles. Marcus
Antonius stated that there were three bases
in the following words But since,
when we are said to have been justified in doing
anything, this does not merely mean that our action
was legal, but further implies that it was just, those
who follow Antonius attempt to differentiate these
bases with greater exactness. They therefore called
them conjectural, legal and juridical, a division which
meets with the approval of Verginius as well. These
they then subdivided into species, placing definition
under the head of the legal basis, together with all
others which are concerned with the letter of the law
such as that of contradictory laws, or that
which rests on the letter of the law and on meaning
or intention which the Greeks call and to which latter we give various
names, styling it the translative, transumptive or transpositive basis; the syllogism, which we call the
ratiocinative or deductive basis; and those which turn
on ambiguity or I mention these because
they are called bases by most writers, though some
prefer to call them legal questions. Athenaeus laid down that there were four bases
the or that is, the
hortative, which is peculiar to deliberative themes;
the which is shown to be the conjectural, not
so much from the name itself, but from what follows; the or definitive, for it consists
in a change of terms.; and the juridical to which
he gives the name employed by other Greek writers. For, as I have said, there is a great variety in the
names employed. There are some who, arguing from
its meaning of change, hold that is the
translative basis, which is concerned with competence.
Others, Caecilius and Theon for instance, hold
that there are the same number of bases, but make
them of a different kind, namely, those covered by
the questions whether a thing is, what it is, of what
kind it is and how great it is. Aristotle in his
Rhetoric states that all enquiry turns on the questions whether a thing is, of what kind it is, how great
it is, and of how many parts it consists. In one
place however he recognises the force of definition
as well, saying that certain points are defended
on the following lines Cicero again in his Rhetorica makes the
number of bases to be four, namely those concerned
with fact, names, kinds, and legal action, that is to say
conjecture is concerned with fact, definition with
names, quality with kinds, and law with action
under this latter head of law he included questions of competence. But in another passage he
treats legal questions as a species of action. Some writers have held that there are five bases the conjectural, definitive, qualitative, quantitative and
relative. Theodorus, also, as I have said, adopts the
same number of general heads, whether a thing is, what
it is, of what kind it is, how great it is, and to what it refers.
The last he considers to be chiefly concerned with
comparison, since better and worse, greater and less are meaningless terms unless referred to some
standard. But questions of relation, as I have already
pointed out, enter also into translative questions, that
is, questions of competence, since in cases such as or For all these questions must be referred
to a certain standard. Others hold that there are
six bases conjecture or quality, particularity or by which word they mean definition, quantity
or comparison and competence, for which a new
term has been found in I call it new
when applied to a basis, for Hermagoras employs it
to describe a species of juridical question. Others
think there are seven, while refusing to recognise
competence, quantity or comparison, in place of which
they substitute four legal bases, completing the
seven by the addition of those three which they call
rational. Others again make eight by the addition
of competence to the above-mentioned seven. Some
on the other hand have introduced a fresh method
of division, reserving the name of bases for the
rational, and giving the name of questions to the legal,
as I mentioned above, since in the former the
problem is concerned with facts, in the latter with
the letter of the law. Some on the contrary reverse
this nomenclature calling the legal questions bases
and the rational grounds questions. But others have
thought that there are only three rational bases,
covered by the questions whether a thing is, what it is,
and of what kind it is Hermagoras is alone in
thinking that there are four, namely conjecture, particularity, competence, and quality to the latter he appends the phrase illustrating his meaning by putting a
case where it is enquired whether a man happen to
be good or bad. He then subdivides quality into
four species first that which is concerned with
things to he sought or avoided, which belongs to deliberative oratory secondly those concerned with
persons, by which he indicates panegyric thirdly the
practical or pragmatic, which is concerned with things
in general without reference to persons, and may be
illustrated by questions such as whether he is free
who is claimed as a slave and waiting the trial of his
case, whether riches beget insolence, and whether a
thing is just or good; lastly there is the juridical
species, under which practically the same questions
arise, but in relation to certain definite persons, as for
instance when it is asked whether that particular man
has done well or ill. I am aware that another explanation is given by Cicero in the first book of his
Rhetorica of the species known as practical,
where he says that it is But I have
already mentioned what his opinion was about this
particular work. The Rhetorica are simply a collection of school-notes on rhetoric which he worked
up into this treatise while quite a young man. Such
faults as they possess are due to his instructor. In the
present instance he may have been influenced by the
fact that the first examples given by Hermagoras of
this species are drawn from legal questions, or by the
fact that the Greeks call interpreters of the law But for these early efforts Cicero substituted his splendid de Oratore and therefore cannot be
blamed for giving false instruction. I will now
return to Hermagoras. He was the first rhetorician
to teach that there was a basis concerned with competence, although the elements of this doctrine are
found in Aristotle, without however any mention of
the name. The legal questions were according to
Hermagoras of five kinds. First the letter of the
law and its intention; the names which he gives to
these are and that is to say
the letter of the law and the exceptions thereto the
first of these classes is found in all writers, but the
term exception is less in use. The number is
completed by the ratiocinative basis and those
dealing with ambiguity and contradictory laws. Albutius
adopts this classification, but eliminates competence,
including it under the juridical basis. Further he
holds that in legal questions there is no ratiocinative
basis. I know that those who are prepared to
read ancient writers on rhetoric more carefully than
I have, will be able to discover yet more on this
subject, but I fear that I may have been too lengthy
even in saying what I have said. I must admit that I am now inclined to take a
different view from that which I once held. It would
perhaps be safer for my reputation if I were to make
no modification in views which I not only held for so
many years, but of which I expressed my open approbation. But I cannot bear to be thought guilty of
concealment of the truth as regards any portion of
my views, more especially in a work designed for the
profit of young men of sound disposition. For Hippocrates, the great physician, in my opinion took the
most honourable course in acknowledging some of his errors to prevent those who came after from
being led astray, while Cicero had no hesitation about
condemning some of his earlier works in books which
he published later I refer to his condemnation of
his Lucullus and Catulus and the books on rhetoric
which I have already mentioned. Indeed we should
have no justification for protracting our studies if we
were forbidden to improve upon our original views.
Still none of my past teaching was superfluous for
the views which I am now going to produce will be
found to be based on the same principles, and consequently no one need be sorry to have attended my
lectures, since all that I am now attempting to do is to
collect and rearrange my original views so that they
may be somewhat more instructive. But I wish to
satisfy everybody and not to lay myself open to the
accusation that I have allowed a long time to elapse
between the formation and publication of my views. I used to follow the majority of authorities in adhering to three rational bases, the conjectural, qualitative and definitive, and to one legal basis. These were
my general bases. The legal basis I divided into five
species, dealing with the letter of the law and intention,
contradictory laws, the syllogism, ambiguity and competence. It is now clear to me that the fourth of the
general bases may be removed, since the original
division which I made into rational and legal bases is
sufficient. The fourth therefore will not be a basis,
but a kind of question; if it were not, it would form
one of the rational bases. Further I have removed
competence from those which I called species. For I
often asserted, as all who have attended my lectures
will remember, and even those discourses which
were published against my will included the statement, that the basis concerned with competence
hardly ever occurs in any dispute under such circumstances that it cannot more correctly be given some
other name, and that consequently some rhetoricians
exclude it from their list of bases. I am, however,
well aware that the point of competence is raised in
many cases, since in practically every case in which
a party is said to have been ruled out of court through
some error of form, questions such as the following
arise whether it was lawful for this person to bring
an action, or to bring it against some particular
person, or under a given law, or in such a court, or
at such a time, and so on But the question of competence as regards persons, times, legal actions and
the rest originates in some pre-existent cause
the question turns therefore not on competence
itself, but on the cause with which the point of
competence originates. The question then arises
whether the sum is too large, and the dispute is one of fact. It then has to be
decided whether he could have been so appointed. The point
in doubt is whether the interdict is legal. All these
points fall under the head of legal questions. not even those special pleas, in which questions of
competence make themselves most evident, give rise to
the same species of question as those laws under
which the action is brought, so that the enquiry is really concerned with the name of a given act, with
the letter of the law and its meaning, or with something that requires to be settled by argument The
basis originates from the question, and in cases of
competence it is not the question concerning which
the advocate argues that is involved, but the question
on account of which he argues. An example will make
this clearer. The question is whether he has killed him;
the basis is the conjectural. But the following case is
very different. The question is whether he
has the right, and it is from this that we derive the basis.
For whether he is allowed the right or not depends
on the event, not on the cause itself, and on the decision of the judge, not on that on account of which
he gives such a decision. The following is a similar
example. The judge will decide whether he should be
punished, but it is not with this that the question or
the basis is concerned. Where then does the question
lie The question is
whether he killed him. Does this involve a
basis I think not. Here
there is a question and a basis as well. So, too, involves no basis. Where then is it to be found In this case the
question is whether he has been so deprived, or
whether loss of civil rights debars a person from bringing an action. Here on the other hand we find
both questions and bases. It is therefore to kinds of
causes, not to bases that the term competence applies
other kinds of cause are the comparative and the recriminatory. it is urged, I do not deny
it, but this does not make it a basis. For these statements are not propositions until the reasons for them
are added. If they were propositions as they stand,
the case could not proceed. The question
is whether this was a justifiable reason, and the basis
is one of quality. So too as regards competence. The question here is what is legal
action. And we shall arrive at the conclusion that the
son's disinheritance is unlawful, by use of the syllogism.
The case will be similar with all the rational and legal
bases. I am aware that there have been some who
placed competence among rational bases, using as
illustrations cases such as, That is to say
it was not due to me, but some external cause. From
these writers I differ even more widely for it is not
the nature of the legal action itself which is involved
in the question of competence, but the cause of the act; and this is the case in almost every defence. Finally
he who adopts this line of defence, does not thereby
abandon the qualitative basis; for he states that he himself is free from blame, so that we really should
differentiate between two kinds of quality one of
which comes into play when both the accused person
and his act are defended, and the other when the
accused person alone is defended. We must therefore accept the view of the authorities followed by Cicero, to the effect that there are
three things on which enquiry is made in every case
we ask whether a thing is, that it is, and of that kind it
is. Nature herself imposes this upon us. For first of all
there must be some subject for the question, since we
cannot possibly determine what a thing is, or of what
kind it is, until we have first ascertained whether it is,
and therefore the first question raised is whether it is.
But even when it is clear that a thing is, it is not
immediately obvious what it is. And when we have
decided what it is, there remains the question of its
quality. These three points once ascertained, there
is no further question to ask. These heads cover both
definite and indefinite questions. One or more of them
is discussed in every demonstrative, deliberative or
forensic theme. These heads again cover all cases in
the courts, whether we regard them from the point
of view of rational or legal questions. For no legal
problem can be settled save by the aid of definition,
quality and conjecture. Those, however, who are
engaged in instructing the ignorant will find it useful
at first to adopt a slightly less rigid method the road
will not be absolutely straight to begin with, but it
will be more open and will provide easier going. I
would have them therefore learn above all things that there are four different methods which may be
employed in every case, and he who is going to plead
should study them as first essentials. For, to begin
with the defendant, far the strongest method of self-defence is, if possible, to deny the charge. The
second best is when it is possible to reply that the
particular act with which you are charged was never
committed. The third and most honourable is to
maintain that the act was justifiable. If none of
these lines of defence are feasible, there remains the
last and only hope of safety if it is impossible either
to deny the charge or justify the act, we must evade
the charge with the aid of some point of law, making
it appear that the action has been brought against us
illegally Hence arise those questions of legal action
or competence. For there are some things, which,
although not laudable in themselves, are yet permitted by law; witness the passage in the Twelve Tables
authorising creditors to divide up a debtor's body
amongst themselves, a law which is repudiated by
public custom. There are also certain things which
although equitable are prohibited by law; witness the
restrictions placed on testamentary disposition. The
accuser likewise has four things which he must keep
in mind he must prove that something was done,
that a particular act was done, that it was wrongly
done, and that he brings his charge according to law.
Thus every cause will turn on the same sorts of
questions, though the parts of plaintiff and defendant
will sometimes be interchanged for instance in the
case of a claim for a reward, it will be the plaintiffs
task to show that what was done was right. These four schemes or forms of action which I then
called general bases fall into two classes as I have shown, namely, the rational and the legal. The
rational is the simpler, as it involves nothing more
than the consideration of the nature of things. In
this connection, therefore, a mere mention of conjeclure, definition and quality will suffice. Legal questions
necessarily have a larger number of species, since
there are many laws and a variety of forms. In the
case of one law we rely on the letter, in others on the
spirit. Some laws we force to serve our turn, when
we can find no law to support our case, others we
compare with one another, and on others we put some
novel interpretation. Thus from these three bases we
get three resemblances of bases sometimes simple,
sometimes complex, but all having a character of their
own, as, for instance, when questions of the letter of
the law and its intention are involved, for these clearly
come under conjecture or quality; or again where the
syllogism is involved, for this is specially connected
with quality; or where contradictory laws are involved,
for these are on the same footing as the letter of the
law and intention; or yet again in cases of ambiguity,
which is always resolved by conjecture. Definition also
belongs to both classes of question, namely those
concerned with the consideration of facts and those
concerned with the letter of the law. All these
questions, although they come under the three bases,
yet since, as I have mentioned, they have certain
characteristic features of their own, require to be
pointed out to learners; and we must allow them
to be called legal bases or questions or minor heads, as
long as it is clearly understood that none of them
involve any other questions than the three I have
mentioned. As regards questions of quantity, number,
relation, and, as some have thought, comparison, the case is different. For these have no connexion with
the complexities of the law, but are concerned with
reason only. Consequently they must always be
regarded as coming under conjecture or quality, as, for
instance, when we ask with what purpose, or at what
time, or place something was done. But I will speak of individual questions when I
come to handle the rules for division. This much is
agreed to by all writers, that one cause possesses one
basis, but that as regards secondary questions related
to the main issue of the trial, there may frequently
be a number in one single cause. I also think there
is at times some doubt as to which basis should be
adopted, when many different lines of defence are
brought to meet a single charge; and, just as in regard to the complexion to be given to the statement
of the facts of the case, that complexion is said to be
the best which the speaker can best maintain, so in
the present connexion I may say that the best basis
to choose is that which will permit the orator to develop a maximum of force. It is for this reason that
we find Cicero and Brutus taking up different lines
in defence of Milo. Cicero says that Clodius was
justifiably killed because he sought to waylay Milo,
but that Milo had not designed to kill him; while
Brutus, who wrote his speech merely as a rhetorical
exercise, also exults that Milo has killed a bad citizen. In complicated causes, however, two or three bases may
be found, or different bases for instance a man may
plead that he did not do one thing, and that he was
justified in doing another, or to take another similar
class of case, a man may deny two of the charges. The same thing occurs when there is a question
about some one thing which is claimed by a number of persons, who may all of them rely on the same
kind of plea for instance, on the right of the next of
kin, or may put in different claims, one urging that
the property was left him by will, another that he is
next of kin. Now whenever a different defence has
to be made against different claimants, there must be
different bases, as for example the well-known controversial theme Nothbus is the Greek word for a bastard;
Latin, as Cato emphasized in one of his speeches, has
no word of its own and therefore borrows the foreign
term. But I am straying from the point. The son
who was made heir by the will finds his way barred
by the law The basis is one resting on
the letter of the law and intention, and the problem is
whether he can inherit by any means at all can he
do so in accordance with the intention of his father
or in virtue of the fact that he was made heir by the
will The problem confronting the bastard is twofold, since he was born after the two legitimate sons and was not born before a legitimate son. The first
problem involves a syllogism are those sons who
have been cast out from their own family to be regarded as though they had never been born The
second is concerned with the letter of the law and
intention. For it is admitted that he was not born
before any legitimate son, but he will defend his
claim by appealing to the intention of the law, which
he will maintain to imply that the bastard, born when
there was no legitimate son in the family, should
rank as legitimate. He will dismiss the letter of the
law, pointing out that in any case the position of a
bastard is not prejudiced by the fact that no legitimate
son was born after him, and arguing as follows It need disturb no one
that one law should originate two bases. The law is
twofold, and therefore has the force of two laws.
To the son who desires to re-enter the family, the
disinherited's first reply is, The basis will be the same as in the claim put forward
by the disinherited son, since the question at issue is
whether a disinherited son can inherit. Both the
disinherited and the bastard will object, But in this connexion each will rely on
his own particular question. For the disinherited son
will say that even a disinherited man does not cease to be a son, and will derive an argument from that
very law which denies his claim to the inheritance;
namely that it was unnecessary for a disinherited son
to be excluded from possession of his father's property
if he had ceased to be one of the family; but now,
since in virtue of his rights as son he would have
been his father's heir if he had died intestate, the
law is brought to bar his claim; and yet the law does
not deprive him of his position as son, but only of his
position as heir. Here the basis is definitive, as turning
on the definition of a son. Again the bastard in his
turn will urge that his father did not die childless,
employing the same arguments that he had used in
putting forward his claim that he ranked as a son;
unless indeed he too has recourse to definition, and
raises the question whether even bastards are not sons.
Thus in one case we shall have either two special
legal bases, namely the letter of the law and intention,
with the syllogism and also definition, or those three
which are really the only bases strictly so called, conjecture as regards the letter of the law and intention,
quality in the syllogism, and definition, which needs no
explanation. Further every kind of case will contain a cause, a
point for the decision of the judge, and a central argument.
For nothing can be said which does not contain a
reason, something to which the decision of the judge
is directed, and finally something which, more than
aught else, contains the substance of the matter at
issue. But as these vary in different cases and are as
a rule explained by writers on judicial causes, I will
postpone them to the appropriate portion of my work.
For the present I shall follow the order which I
prescribed by my division of causes into three classes. VII. I will begin with the class of causes which are
concerned with praise and blame. This class appears
to have been entirely divorced by Aristotle, and
following him by Theophrastus, from the practical
side of oratory which they call  and to
have been reserved solely for the delectation of
audiences, which indeed is shown to be its peculiar
function by its name, which implies display. Roman
usage on the other hand has given it a place in the
practical tasks of life. For funeral orations are
often imposed as a duty on persons holding public
office, or entrusted to magistrates by decree of the
senate. Again the award of praise or blame to a
witness may carry weight in the courts, while it is
also a recognised practice to produce persons to
praise the character of the accused. Further the
published speeches of Cicero directed against his
rivals in the election to the consulship, and
against Lucius Piso, Clodius and Curio, are full of
denunciation, and were notwithstanding delivered in
the senate as formal expressions of opinion in the
course of debate. I do not deny that some compositions of this kind are composed solely with a view
to display, as, for instance, panegyrics of gods and
heroes of the past, a consideration which provides
the solution of a question which I discussed a little
while back, and proves that those are wrong who
hold that an orator will never speak on a subject
unless it involves some problem. But what problem
is involved by the praise of Jupiter Capitolinus, a
stock theme of the sacred Capitoline contest, which
is undoubtedly treated in regular rhetorical form However, just as panegyric applied to practical
matters requires proof, so too a certain semblance of
proof is at times required by speeches composed
entirely for display. For instance, a speaker who tells
how Romulus was the son of Mars and reared by the
she-wolf, will offer as proofs of his divine origin the
facts that when thrown into a running stream he
escaped drowning, that all his achievements were such
as to make it credible that he was the offspring of the
god of battles, and that his contemporaries unquestionably believed that he was translated to heaven. Some arguments will even wear a certain semblance
of defence for example, if the orator is speaking
in praise of Hercules, he will find excuses for his
hero having changed raiment with the Queen of
Lydia and submitted to the tasks which legend tells
us she imposed upon him. The proper function
however of panegyric is to amplify and embellish its
themes. This form of oratory is directed in the main to
the praise of gods and men, but may occasionally be
applied to the praise of animals or even of inanimate objects. In praising the gods our first step
will be to express our veneration of the majesty of
their nature in general terms. next we shall proceed
to praise the special power of the individual god and
the discoveries whereby he has benefited the human
race. For example, in the case of Jupiter, we shall
extol his power as manifested in the governance of
all things, with Mars we shall praise his power in war,
with Neptune his power over the sea; as regards
inventions we shall celebrate Minerva's discovery of
the arts, Mercury's discovery of letters, Apollo's of
medicine, Ceres' of the fruits of the earth, Bacchus' of wine. Next we must record their exploits as
handed down from antiquity. Even gods may derive honour from their descent, as for instance is
the case with the sons of Jupiter, or from their
antiquity, as in the case of the children of Chaos, or
from their offspring, as in the case of Latona, the
mother of Apollo and Diana. Some again may be
praised because they were born immortal, others
because they won immortality by their valour, a theme
which the piety of our sovereign has made the glory
even of these present times. There is greater variety required in the praise of
men. In the first place there is a distinction to be
made as regards time between the period in which
the objects of our praise lived and the time preceding their birth; and further, in the case of the
dead, we must also distinguish the period following
their death. With regard to things preceding a
man's birth, there are his country, his parents and his
ancestors, a theme which may be handled in two
ways. For either it will be creditable to the objects of
our praise not to have fallen short of the fair fame of
their country and of their sires or to have ennobled
a humble origin by the glory of their achievements. Other topics to be drawn from the period preceding
their birth will have reference to omens or prophecies foretelling their future greatness, such as the
oracle which is said to have foretold that the son of
Thetis would be greater than his father. of the individual himself will be based on his
character, his physical endowments and external
circumstances. Physical and accidental advantages
provide a comparatively unimportant theme, which
requires variety of treatment. At times for instance we extol beauty and strength in honorific terms, as
Homer does in the case of Agamemnon and
Achilles; at times again weakness may contribute
largely to our admiration, as when Homer says that
Tydeus was small of stature but a good fighter. Fortune too may confer dignity as in the case of
kings and princes for they have a fairer field for
the display of their excellences but on the other
hand the glory of good deeds may be enhanced by
the smallness of their resources. Moreover the
praise awarded to external and accidental advantages
is given, not to their possession, but to their honourable employment. For wealth and power and influence, since they are the sources of strength, are the
surest test of character for good or evil; they make us
better or they make us worse. Praise awarded to
character is always just, but may be given in various
ways. It has sometimes proved the more effective
course to trace a man's life and deeds in due chronological order, praising his natural gifts as a child, then
his progress at school, and finally the whole course of
his life, including words as well as deeds. At times
on the other hand it is well to divide our praises,
dealing separately with the various virtues, fortitude, justice, self-control and the rest of them and
to assign to each virtue the deeds performed under
its influence. We shall have to decide which of
these two methods will be the more serviceable,
according to the nature of the subject; but we
must bear in mind the fact that what most pleases
an audience is the celebration of deeds which our
hero was the first or only man or at any rate one of
the very few to perform and to these we must add
any other achievements which surpassed hope or expectation, emphasising what was done for the sake
of others rather than what he performed on his
own behalf. It is not always possible to deal with
the time subsequent to our hero's death this is
due not merely to the fact that we sometimes praise
him, while still alive, but also that there are but few
occasions when we have a chance to celebrate the
award of divine honours, posthumous votes of thanks,
or statues erected at the public expense. Among
such themes of panegyric I would mention monuments of genius that have stood the test of time.
For some great men like Menander have received
ampler justice from the verdict of posterity than
from that of their own age. Children reflect glory
on their parents, cities on their founders, laws on
those who made them, arts on their inventors and
institutions on those that first introduced them; for
instance Numa first laid down rules for the worship
of the gods, and Publicola first ordered that the
lictors' rods should be lowered in salutation to the
people. The same method will be applied to denunciations
as well, but with a view to opposite effects. For humble
origin has been a reproach to many, while in some
cases distinction has merely served to increase the
notoriety and unpopularity of vices. In regard to
some persons, as in the story of Paris, it has been
predicted that they would be the cause of destruction
to many, some like Thersites and Irus have been
despised for their poverty and mean appearance,
others have been loathed because their natural advantages were nullified by their vices the poets for
instance tell us that Nireus was a coward and
Pleisthenes a debauchee. The mind too has as many vices as virtues, and vice may be denounced,
as virtue may be praised, in two different ways.
Some have been branded with infamy after death
like Maelius, whose house was levelled with the
ground, or Marcus Manlius, whose first name was
banished from his family for all generations to
come. The vices of the children bring hatred on
their parents; founders of cities are detested for
concentrating a race which is a curse to others, as
for example the founder of the Jewish superstition; the laws of Gracchus are hated, and we
abhor any loathsome example of vice that has been
handed down to posterity, such as the criminal form of
lust which a Persian is said to have been the first to
practise on a woman of Samos. And even in the
case of the living the judgment of mankind serves
as a proof of their character, and the fairness or
foulness of their fame proves the orator's praise or
blame to be true. Aristotle however thinks that the place and subject of panegyrics or denunciations make a very considerable difference. For much depends on the
character of the audience and the generally received
opinion, if they are to believe that the virtues of
which they approve are pre-eminently characteristic
of the person praised and the vices which they hate
of the person denounced. For there can be
little doubt as to the attitude of the audience,
if that attitude is already determined prior to
the delivery of the speech. It will be wise
too for him to insert some words of praise for
his audience, since this will secure their good
will, and wherever it is possible this should be done
in such a manner as to advance his case. Literature will win less praise at Sparta than at Athens, endurance and courage more. Among some races the life
of a freebooter is accounted honourable, while others
regard it as a duty to respect the laws. Frugality
might perhaps be unpopular with the Sybarites,
whilst luxury was regarded as a crime by the ancient Romans. Similar differences of opinion are
found in individuals. A judge is most favourable to
the orator whose views he thinks identical with his
own. Aristotle also urges a point, which at a later
date Cornelius Celsus emphasised almost to excess,
to the effect that, since the boundary between vice
and virtue is often ill-defined, it is desirable to use
words that swerve a little from the actual truth,
calling a rash man brave, a prodigal generous, a mean
man thrifty; or the process may, if necessary, be reversed. But this the ideal orator, that is to say a
good man, will never do, unless perhaps he is led to
do so by consideration for the public interest. Cities are praised after the same fashion as men.
The founder takes the place of the parent, and antiquity carries great authority, as for instance in the
case of those whose inhabitants are said to be sprung
from the soil. The virtues and vices revealed by
their deeds are the same as in private individuals.
The advantages arising from site or fortifications are
however peculiar to cities. Their citizens enhance
their fame just as children bring honour to their
parents. Praise too may be awarded to public works,
in connexion with which their magnificence,
utility, beauty and the architect or artist must
be given due consideration. Temples for instance
will be praised for their magnificence, walls for their utility, and both for their beauty or the skill of
the architect. Places may also be praised, witness
the praise of Sicily in Cicero. In such cases
we consider their beauty and utility beauty calls for
notice in places by the sea, in open plains and
pleasant situations, utility in healthy or fertile
localities. Again praise in general terms may be
awarded to noble sayings or deeds. Finally things
of every kind may be praised. Panegyrics have
been composed on sleep and death, and physicians
have written eulogies on certain kinds of food. While therefore I do not agree that panegyric
concerns only questions regarding what is honourable, I do think that it comes as a rule under
the heading of quality, although all three bases may
he involved in Panegyric and it was observed by
Cicero that all were actually used by Gaius Caesar
in his denunciation of Cato. But panegyric is akin
to deliberative oratory inasmuch as the same things
are usually praised in the former as are advised
in the latter. VIII. I am surprised that deliberative oratory also
has been restricted by some authorities to questions
of expediency. If it should be necessary to assign
one single aim to deliberative I should prefer
Cicero's view that this kind of oratory is primarily
concerned with what is honourable. I do not doubt
that those who maintain the opinion first mentioned
adopt the lofty view that nothing can be expedient
which is not good. That opinion is perfectly sound
so long as we are fortunate enough to have wise and
good men for counsellors. But as we most often
express our views before an ignorant audience, and
more especially before popular assemblies, of which the majority is usually uneducated, we must distinguish between what is honourable and what is expedient and conform our utterances to suit ordinary
understandings. For there are many who do not
admit that what they really believe to be the honourable course is sufficiently advantageous, and are
misled by the prospect of advantage into approving
courses of the dishonourable nature of which there
can be no question witness the Numantine treaty
and the surrender of the Caudine Forks. Nor does
it suffice to restrict deliberative oratory to the basis
of quality which is concerned with questions of
honour and expediency. For there is often room
for conjecture as well. Sometimes again definition
is necessary or legal problems require handling; this
is especially the case when advice has to be given
on private matters, where there is some doubt of
the legality of the course under consideration. Of
conjecture' I shall speak more fully a little later
on. Returning to definition for the moment, we
find it in the question raised by Demosthenes, and to that discussed by Cicero in the Philippics as
to the nature of a tumultus. Again does not the
question raised in connection with the statue of
Servius Sulpicius as to bear a strong resemblance to
the questions that are raised in the law courts The
deliberative department of oratory also called the advisory department, while it deliberates about the
future, also enquires about the past, while its functions are twofold and consist in advising and
dissuading. Deliberative oratory does not always require an
exordium, such as is necessary in forensic speeches,
since he who asks an orator for his opinion is naturally
well disposed to him. But the commencement, whatever be its nature, must have some resemblance to an
exordium. For we must not begin abruptly or just at
the point where the fancy takes us, since in every
subject there is something which naturally comes first. In addressing the senate or the people the same
methods apply as in the law courts, and we must aim
as a rule at acquiring the goodwill of our audience.
This need cause no surprise, since even in panegyric
we seek to win the favour of our hearers when our
aim is praise pure and simple, and not the acquisition
of any advantage. Aristotle, it is true, holds, not
without reason, that in deliberative speeches we may
often begin with a reference either to ourselves or to
our opponent, borrowing this practice from forensic
oratory, and sometimes producing the impression that
the subject is of greater or less importance than it
actually is. On the other hand he thinks that in
demonstrative oratory the exordium may be treated with
the utmost freedom, since it is sometimes drawn from
irrelevant material, as for example in Isocrates' Praise
of Helen, or from something akin to the subject,
as for instance in the Panegyricus of the same author,
when he complains that more honour is given to physical than to moral excellence, or as Gorgias in his
speech delivered at the Olympic games praises the
founders of the great national games. Sallust seems to have imitated these authors in his Jugurthine War
and in the introduction to his Catiline, which has no
connection with his narrative. But it is time for me to return to deliberative oratory
in which, even when we introduce an exordium, we
must content ourselves with a brief prelude, which
may amount to no more than a mere heading. As
regards the statement of facts, this is never required in
speeches on private subjects, at least as regards the
subject on which an opinion has to be given, because
everyone is acquainted with the question at issue. Statements as to external matters which are relevant
to the discussion may however frequently be introduced. In addressing public assemblies it will often
be necessary to set forth the order of the points
which have to be treated. As regards appeals to the
emotions, these are especially necessary in deliberative
oratory. Anger has frequently to be excited or
assuaged and the minds of the audience have to be
swayed to fear, ambition, hatred, reconciliation. At
times again it is necessary to awaken pity, whether it
is required, for instance, to urge that relief should be
sent to a besieged city, or we are engaged in deploring the overthrow of an allied state. But what really
carries greatest weight in deliberative speeches is the
authority of the speaker. For he, who would have
all men trust his judgment as to what is expedient
and honourable, should both possess and be regarded as possessing genuine wisdom and excellence
of character. In forensic speeches the orator may,
according to the generally received opinion, indulge
his passion to some extent. But all will agree that
the advice given by a speaker should be in keeping
with his moral character. The majority of Greek writers have held that this
kind of oratory is entirely concerned with addressing
public assemblies and have restricted it to politics. Even Cicero himself deals chiefly with this department. Consequently those who propose to offer advice
upon peace, war, troops, public works or revenue must
thoroughly acquaint themselves with two things, the
resources of the state and the character of its people,
so that the method employed in tendering their advice may be based at once on political realities and
the nature of their hearers. This type of oratory
seems to me to offer a more varied field for eloquence,
since both those who ask for advice and the answers
given to them may easily present the greatest diversity. Consequently there are three points which must
be specially borne in mind in advice or dissuasion
first the nature of the subject under discussion,
secondly the nature of those who are engaged in the
discussion, and thirdly the nature of the speaker who
offers them advice. As to the subject under discussion
its practicability is either certain or uncertain. In
the latter case this will be the chief, if not
the only point for consideration; for it will often
happen that we shall assert first that something
ought not to be done, even if it can be done, and
secondly, that it cannot be done. Now when
the question turns on such points as to whether the
Isthmus can be cut through, the Pontine Marshes
drained, or a harbour constructed at Ostia, or whether
Alexander is likely to find land beyond the Ocean,
we make use of conjecture. But even in connection
with things that are undoubtedly feasible, there may
at times be room for conjecture, as for instance in
questions such as whether Rome is ever likely to conquer Carthage, whether Hannibal will return to
Africa if Scipio transports his army thither, or whether
the Samnites are likely to keep faith if the Romans
lay down their arms. There are some things too
which we may believe to be both feasible and likely
to be carried into effect, but at another time or place
or in another way. When there is no scope for conjecture, our attention will be fixed on other points. In the first place
advice will be asked either on account of the actual
thing on which the orator is required to express his
views, or on account of other causes which affect it
from without. It is on the actual thing that the
senate for instance debates, when it discusses such
questions as whether it is to vote pay for the troops.
In this case the material is simple. To this however
may be added reasons for taking action or the reverse,
as for example if the senate should discuss whether
it should deliver the Fabii to the Gauls when the
latter threaten war, or Gaius Caesar should deliberate
whether he should persist in the invasion of Germany,
when his soldiers on all sides are making their wills.
These deliberative themes are of a twofold nature. In the first case the reason for deliberation is the
Gallic threat of war, but there may still be a further
question as to whether even without such threat of
war they should surrender those who, contrary to the
law of nations, took part in a battle when they had
been sent out as ambassadors and killed the king
with whom they had received instructions to treat. In the second case Caesar would doubtless never deliberate on the question at all, but for the perturbation
shown by his soldiers; but there is still room for
enquiry whether quite apart from this occurrence it would be wise to penetrate into Germany. But it
must be remembered that we shall always speak first
on that subject which is capable of discussion quite
apart from the consequences. Some have held that the three main considerations
in an advisory speech are honour, expediency and
necessity. I can find no place for the last. For however great the violence which may threaten us, it may
be necessary for us to suffer something, but we are not
compelled to do anything; whereas the subject of
deliberation is primarily whether we shall do anything. Or if by necessity they mean that into which we are
driven by fear of worse things, the question will be one
of expediency. For example, if a garrison is besieged
by overwhelmingly superior forces and, owing to the
failure of food and water supplies, discusses surrender
to the enemy, and it is urged that it is a matter of
necessity, the words must
needs be added consequently there is no necessity
arising out of the circumstances themselves, for death
is a possible alternative. And as a matter of fact the
Saguntines did not surrender, nor did those who were
surrounded on the raft from Opitergium. It follows
that in such cases also the question will be either one
of expediency alone or of a choice between expediency and honour. it will be urged, Certainly. But he who wishes to
become a father must needs be quite clear that he
must take a wife. It appears to me, therefore, that
where necessity exists, there is no room for deliberation, any more than where it is clear that a thing is not feasible. For deliberation is always concerned
with questions where some doubt exists. Those
therefore are wiser who make the third consideration
for deliberative oratory to be or as we translate it; the translation may seem clumsy,
but it is the only word available. That all these
considerations need not necessarily obtrude themselves in every case is too obvious to need explanation.
Most writers, however, say that there are more than
three. But the further considerations which they
would add are really but species of the three general
considerations just mentioned. For right, justice,
piety, equity and mercy for thus they translate , with any other virtues that anyone may be
pleased to add, all come under the heading of that
which is honourable. On the other hand, if the question
be whether a thing is easy, great, pleasant or free from
danger, it comes under questions of expediency. Such
topics arise from some contradiction; for example a
thing is expedient, but difficult, or trivial, or unpleasant, or dangerous. Some however hold that at
times deliberation is concerned solely with the question
whether a thing is pleasant, as for instance when discussion arises as to whether a theatre should be built or
games instituted. But in my opinion you will never
find any man such a slave to luxury as not to consider
anything but pleasure when he delivers an advisory
speech. For there must needs be something on every
occasion that takes precedence of pleasure in proposing the institution of public games there is the honour
due to the gods; in proposing the erection of a
theatre the orator will consider the advantages to be
derived from relaxation from toil, and the unbecoming
and undesirable struggle for places which will arise if there is no proper accommodation; religion, too, has
its place in the discussion, for we shall describe the
theatre as a kind of temple for the solemnization of a
sacred feast. Often again we shall urge that honour
must come before expediency; as for instance when
we advise the men of Opitergium not to surrender to
the enemy, even though refusal to do so means
certain death. At times on the other hand we prefer
expediency to honour, as when we advise the arming
of slaves in the Punic War. But even in this case we
must not openly admit that such a course is dishonourable we can point out that all men are free by
nature and composed of the same elements, while
the slaves in question may perhaps be sprung
from some ancient and noble stock; and in the
former case when the danger is so evident,
we may add other arguments, such as that they
would perish even more cruelly if they surrendered,
should the enemy fail to keep faith, or Caesar a
more probable supposition prove victorious. But
in such a conflict of principles it is usual to modify
the names which we give them. For expediency is
often ruled out by those who assert not merely that
honour comes before expediency, but that nothing
can be expedient that is not honourable, while others
say that what we call honour is vanity, ambition and
folly, as contemptible in substance as it is fair in
sound. Nor is expediency compared merely with
inexpediency. At times we have to choose between
two advantageous courses after comparison of their
respective advantages. The problem may be still
more complicated, as for instance when Pompey
deliberated whether to go to Parthia, Africa or
Egypt. In such a case the enquiry is not which of two courses is better or worse, but which of three or
more. On the other hand in deliberative oratory there
will never be any doubt about circumstances wholly
in our favour. For there can clearly be no doubt about
points against which there is nothing to be said.
Consequently as a rule all deliberative speeches are
based simply on comparison, and we must consider
what we shall gain and by what means, that it may be
possible to form an estimate whether there is more
advantage in the aims we pursue or greater disadvantage in the means we employ to that end. A
question of expediency may also be concerned with
time for example, 
or with place  or
with particular persons  or  or with our method of
action  or with
degree . But we have still more often to consider personality with reference to what is becoming, and we
must consider our own as well as that of those
before whom the question is laid. Consequently,
though examples are of the greatest value in
deliberative speeches, because reference to historical parallels is the quickest method of securing assent, it matters a great deal whose authority
is adduced and to whom it is commended. For
the minds of those who deliberate on any subject differ from one another and our audience may
be of two kinds. For those who ask us for advice are either single individuals or a number, and
in both cases the factors may be different. For
when advice is asked by a number of persons it
makes a considerable difference whether they are the senate or the people, the citizens of Rome or
Fidenae, Greeks or barbarians, and in the case of
single individuals, whether we are urging Cato or
Gaius Marius to stand for office, whether it is the
elder Scipio or Fabius who is deliberating on his plan
of campaign. Further sex, rank, and age, must be
taken into account, though it is character that will
make the chief difference. It is an easy task to
recommend an honourable course to honourable
men, but if we are attempting to keep men of bad
character to the paths of virtue, we must take care
not to seem to upbraid a way of life unlike our own. The minds of such an audience are not to be moved
by discoursing on the nature of virtue, which they
ignore, but by praise, by appeals to popular opinion,
and if such vanities are of no avail, by demonstration
of the advantage that will accrue from such a policy,
or more effectively perhaps by pointing out the
appalling consequences that will follow the opposite
policy. For quite apart from the fact that the minds
of unprincipled men are easily swayed by terror, I
am not sure that most men's minds are not more
easily influenced by fear of evil than by hope of
good, for they find it easier to understand what is
evil than what is good. Sometimes again we urge
good men to adopt a somewhat unseemly course,
while we advise men of poor character to take a
course in which the object is the advantage of
those who seek our advice. I realise the thought
that will immediately occur to my reader Cicero might clear me from blame in the
matter; for he writes to Brutus in the following
terms, after setting forth a number of things that might honourably be urged on Caesar However, this is a
somewhat abstruse question, and does not concern
deliberative oratory alone. I shall therefore reserve
it for my twelfth and concluding book. For my part
I would not have anything done dishonourably. But
for the meantime let us regard these questions as at
least belonging to the rhetorical exercises of the
schools for knowledge of evil is necessary to enable
us the better to defend what is right. For the
present I will only say that if anyone is going to urge
a dishonourable course on honourable man, he
should remember not to urge it as being dishonourable, and should avoid the practice of certain declaimers who urge Sextus Pompeius to piracy just
because it is dishonourable and cruel. Even when we
address bad men, we should gloss over what is unsightly. For there is no man so evil as to wish to
seem so. Thus Sallust makes Catiline speak as one
who is driven to crime not by wickedness but by indignation, and Varius makes Atreus say How much more has this pretence of honour to be
kept up by those who have a real regard for their
own good name Therefore when we advise Cicero
to beg Antonius for mercy or even to burn the
Philippics if Antonius promises to spare him on that
condition, we shall not empliasise the love of life in
our advice for if that passion has any force with him, it will have it none the less if we are silent,
but we shall exhort him to save himself in the interest of the state. For he needs some such reason
as that to preserve him from feeling shame at entreating such a one as Antony. Again if we urge
Gaius Caesar to accept the crown we shall assert
that the state is doomed to destruction unless controlled by a monarchy. For the sole aim of the man
who is deliberating about committing a criminal act
is to make his act appear as little wicked as possible. It also makes a great deal of difference who it is
that is offering the advice for if his past has been
illustrious, or if his distinguished birth or age or
fortune excite high expectations, care must be taken
that his words are not unworthy of him. If on the
other hand he has none of these advantages he will
have to adopt a humbler tone. For what is regarded
as liberty in some is called licence in others. Some
receive sufficient support from their personal
authority, while others find that the force of reason
itself is scarce sufficient to enable them to maintain
their position. Consequently I regard impersonation as the most
difficult of tasks, imposed as it is in addition to the
other work involved by a deliberative theme. For
the same speaker has on one occasion to impersonate
Caesar, on another Cicero or Cato. But it is a most
useful exercise because it demands a double effort
and is also of the greatest use to future poets and
historians, while for orators of course it is absolutely
necessary. For there are many speeches composed
by Greek and Latin orators for others to deliver, the
words of which had to be adapted to suit the position and character of those for whom they were written. Do you suppose that Cicero thought in the
same way or assumed the same character when he
wrote for Gnaeus Pompeius and when he wrote for
Titus Ampius and the rest Did he not rather bear
in mind the fortune, rank and achievements of each
single individual and represent the character of all
to whom he gave a voice so that though they spoke
better than they could by nature, they still might
seem to speak in their own persons For a speech
which is out of keeping with the man who delivers
it is just as faulty as the speech which fails to suit
the subject to which it should conform. It is for
this reason that Lysias is regarded as having shown
the highest art in the speeches which he wrote for
uneducated persons, on account of their extraordinary realism. In the case of declaimers indeed it is
of the first importance that they should consider
what best suits each character for they rarely play
the role of advocates in their declamations. As a
rule they impersonate sons, parents, rich men, old
men, gentle or harsh of temper, misers, superstitious persons, cowards and mockers, so that hardly
even comic actors have to assume more numerous
roles in their performances on the stage than
these in their declamations. All these rles may
be regarded as forming part of impersonation,
which I have included under delibertive themes,
from which it differs merely in that it involves the
assumption of a role. It is sometimes introduced
even with controversial themes, which are drawn
from history and involve the appearance of definite
historical characters as pleaders. I am aware also
that historical and poetical themes are often set for
the sake of practice, such as Priam's speech to Achilles or Sulla's address to the people on his
resignation of the dictatorship. But these will fall
under one or other of the three classes into which
I have divided causes. For entreaty, statement,
and argument, with other themes already mentioned,
are all of frequent occurrence in forensic, deliberative
or demonstrative subjects, according as circumstances
demand, and we often introduce fictitious speeches
of historical persons, whom we select ourselves.
Cicero for instance in the pro Caelio makes both
Appius Caecus and her brother Clodius address
Clodia, the former rebuking her for her immorality,
the latter exhorting her thereto. In scholastic declamations the fictitious themes for
deliberative speeches are often not unlike those of
controversial speeches and are a compromise between
the two forms, as for instance when the theme set is
a discussion in the presence of Gaius Caesar of the
punishment to be meted out to Theodotus; for it consists of accusation and defence, both of them peculiar
to forensic oratory. But the topic of expediency also
enters into the case, in such questions as whether it
was to Caesar's advantage that Pompeius should be
slain; whether the execution of Theodotus would
involve the risk of a war with the king of Egypt;
whether such a war would be highly inopportune at
such a critical moment, would prove dangerous and
be certain to last a long time. There is also a question
of honour. Does it befit Caesar to avenge Pompeius'
death or is it to be feared that an admission that
Pompeius did not deserve death will injure the cause
of the Caesarian party It may be noted that discussions of such a kind may well occur in actual
cases. Declaimers have however often been guilty of an
error as regards deliberative themes which has involved a series of consequences. They have considered deliberative themes to be different and
absolutely opposed to forensic themes. For they have
always affected abrupt openings, an impetuous style
and a generous embellishment, as they call it, in their
language, and have been especially careful to make
shorter notes for deliberative than for forensic themes. For my part while I realise that deliberative themes
do not require an exordium, for reasons which I have
already stated, I do not, however, understand why
they should open in such a wild and exclamatory
manner. When a man is asked to express his opinion
on any subject, he does not, if he is sane, begin to
shriek, but endeavours as far as possible to win the
assent of the man who is considering the question by
a courteous and natural opening. Why, I ask, in review of the fact that deliberations require moderation
above all else, should the speaker on such themes indulge in a torrential style of eloquence kept at one
high level of violence I acknowledge that in controversial speeches the tone is often lowered in the
exordium, the statement of facts and the argument, and
that if you subtract these three portions, the remainder is more or less of the deliberative type of
speech, but what remains must likewise be of a more
even flow, avoiding all violence and fury. With
regard to manificence of language, deliblerative declaimers should avoid straining after it more than
others, but it comes to them more naturally. For
there is a preference among those who invent such
themes for selecting great personages, such as kings,
princes, senators and peoples, while the theme itself is generally on a grander scale. Consequently since
the words are suited to the theme, they acquire
additional splendour from the magnificence of the
matter. In actual deliberations the case is different,
and consequently Theophrastus laid it down that in
the deliberative class of oratory the language should
as far as possible be free from all affectation in
stating this view he followed the authority of his instructor, although as a rule he is not afraid to differ
from him. For Aristotle held that the demonstrative
type of oratory was the best suited for writing and
that the next best was forensic oratory his reason for
this view was that the first type is entirely concerned
with display, while the second requires art, which
will even be employed to deceive the audience, if
expedience should so demand, whereas advice requires
only truth and prudence. I agree with this view as
regards demonstrative oratory in fact all writers are
agreed on this point, but as regards forensic and deliberative themes I think that the style must be suited to
the requirements of the subject which has to be treated. For I notice that the Philippics of Demosthenes
are pre-eminent for the same merits as his forensic
speeches, and that the opinions expressed by Cicero
before the senate or the people are as remarkable for
the splendour of their eloquence as the speeches
which he delivered in accusing or defending persons
before the courts. And yet Cicero says of deliberative oratory that the whole speech should be simple
and dignified, and should derive its ornament rather
from the sentiments expressed than the actual words. As regards the use of examples practically all authorities are with good reason agreed that there is no
subject to which they are better suited, since as a rule history seems to repeat itself and the experience
of the past is a valuable support to reason. Brevity
and copiousness are determined not so much by the
nature as by the compass of the subject. For, just as
in deliberations the question is generally less complicated, so in forensic cases it is often of less
importance. Anyone who is content to read not merely speeches,
but history as well, in preference to growing grey over
the notebooks of the rhetoricians, will realise the
truth of what I say for in the historians the speeches
delivered to the people and the opinions expressed
in the senate often provide examples of advice and
dissuasion. he will find an avoidance of abrupt
openings in deliberatire speeches and will note that
the forensic style is often the more impetuous of the
two, while in both cases the words are suited to the
matter and forensic speeches are often shorter than
deliberative. Nor will he find in them those faults into
which some of our declaimers fall, namely a coarse
abuse of those who hold opposite opinions and a
general tendency to speak in such a way as to make
it seem that the speaker's views are in opposition to
those of the persons who ask his advice. Consequently
their aim seems to be invective rather than persuasion. I would have my younger readers realise that these
words are penned for their special benefit that they
may not desire to adopt a different style in their
exercises from that in which they will be required to
speak, and may not be hampered by having to unlearn what they have acquired. For the rest if they
are ever summoned to take part in the counsels of
their friends, or to speak their opinions in the senate,
or advise the emperor on some point on which he may consult them, they will learn from practice
what they cannot perhaps put to the credit of the
schools. IX. I now come to the forensic kind of oratory,
which presents the utmost variety, but whose duties
are no more than two, the bringing and rebutting
of charges. Most authorities divide the forensic
speech into five parts the exordium, the statement of
facts, the proof, the refutation, and the peroration.
To these some have added the partition into heads,
proposition and digression, the two first of which
form part of the proof. For it is obviously
necessary to propound what you are going to prove
as well as to conclude. Why then, if proposition is a
part of a speech, should not conclusion be also Partition on the other hand is merely one aspect of
arrangement, and arrangement is a part of rhetoric
itself, and is equally distributed through every theme
of oratory and their whole body, just as are invention
and style. Consequently we must regard partition
not as one part of a whole speech, but as a part of
each individual question that may be involved. For
what question is there in which an orator cannot
set forth the order in which he is going to make
his points And this of course is the function of partition. But how ridiculous it is to make each question an aspect of proof, but partition which is an
aspect of a question a part of the whole speech. As
for digression egressio, now more usually styled
excessus, if it lie outside the case, it cannot be part
of it, while, if it lie within it, it is merely an accessory or ornament of that portion of the case from
which digression is made. For if anything that lies
within the case is to be called part of it, why not call argument, comparison, commonplace, pathos, illustration parts of the case On the other hand I
disagree with those who, like Aristotle, would remove refuation from the list on the ground that it
forms part of the proof for the proof is constructive, and the reputation destructive. Aristotle also
introduces another slight novelty in making proposition, not statement of facts, follow the exordium. This
however he does because he regards proposition as
the genus and statement of facts as the species, with
the result that he holds that, whereas the former is
always and everywhere necessary, the latter may
sometimes be dispensed with. It is however necessary to point out as regards
these five parts which I have established, that that
which has to be spoken first is not necessarily that
which requires our first consideration. But above
all we must consider the nature of the case,
the question at issue and the arguments for and
against. Next we must consider what points are
to be made, and what refuted, and then how the
facts are to be stated. For the stalement of facts is
designed to prepare the way for the proofs and must
needs be unprofitable, unless we have first determined what proofs. are to be promised in the statement. Finally we must consider how best to win the
judge to take our view. For we cannot be sure until
we have subjected all the parts of the case to careful
scrutiny, what sort of impression we wish to make
upon the judge are we to mollify him or increase
his severity, to excite or relax his interest in the
case, to render him susceptible to influence or the
reverse I cannot however approve the view of those who think that the exordium should actually be written last.
For though we must collect all our material and determine the proper place for each portion of it, before
we begin to speak or write, we must commence with
what naturally comes first. No one begins a portrait
by painting or modelling the feet, and no art finds its
completion at the point where it should begin.
Otherwise what will happen if we have not time to
write our speech Will not the result of such a
reversal of the proper order of things be that we
shall be caught napping We must therefore review the subject-matter in the order laid down, but
write our speech in the order in which we shall
deliver it. X. Every cause in which one side attacks and the
other defends consists either of one or more controversial questions. In the first case it is called simple,
in the second complex. An example of the first is
when the subject of enquiry is a theft or an adultery
taken by itself. In complex cases the several questions may all be of the same kind, as in cases of
extortion, or of different kinds, as when a man is
accused at one and the same time of homicide and
sacrilege. Such cases no longer arise in the public
courts, since the praetor allots the different charges
to different courts in accordance with a definite rule;
but they still are of frequent occurrence in the
Imperial or Senatorial courts, and were frequent in
the days when they came up for trial before the
people. Private suits again are often tried by one
judge, who may have to determine many different
points of law. There are no other species of forensic
causes, not even when one person brings the same
suit on the same grounds against two different persons, or two persons bring the same suit against
one, or several against several, as occasionally occurs
in lawsuits about inheritances. Because although a
number of parties may be involved, there is still only
one suit, unless indeed the different circumstances
of the various parties alter the questions at issue. There is however said to be a third and different
class, the comparative. Questions of comparison frequently require to be handled in portions of a cause,
as for instance in the centum viral court, when after
other questions have been raised the question is discussed as to which of two claimants is the more deserving of an inheritance. It is rare however for a
case to be brought into court on such grounds alone,
as in divinations which take place to determine who
the accuser shall be, and occasionally when two informers dispute as to which has earned the reward. Some again have added a fourth class, namely
mutual accusation, which they call Others, however, regard it as belonging to the comparative group, to which indeed the common case of
reciprocal suits on different grounds bears a strong
resemblance. If this latter case should also be called for it has no special name of its own, we
must divide mutual accusation into two classes, in one
of which the parties bring the same charge against
each other, while in the other they bring different
charges. The same division will also apply to claims. As soon as we are clear as to the kind of cause on
which we are engaged, we must then consider
whether the act that forms the basis of the charge
is denied or defended, or given another name or
excepted from that class of action. Thus we determine the basis of each case. XI. As soon as these points are ascertained, the
next step, according to Hermagoras, should be to
consider what is the question at issue, the line of defence,
the point for the judge's decision and the central point,
or, as others call it, the foundation of the case. The
question in its more general sense is taken to mean
everything on which two or more plausible opinions
may be advanced. In forensic subjects however it
must be taken in two senses first in the sense in
which we say that a controversial matter involves
many questions, thereby including all minor questions; secondly in the sense of the main question on
which the case turns. It is of this, with which the
basis originates, that I am now speaking. We ask
whether a thing has been done, what it is that has
been done, and whether it was rightly done. To these Hermagoras and Apollodorus and many other
writers have given the special name of questions;
Theodorus on the other hand, as I have already said,
calls them general heads, while he designates minor
questions or questions dependent on these general
heads as special heads. For it is agreed that question
may spring from question, and species be subdivided
into other species. This main question, then, they
call the The line of defence is the method by
which an admitted act is defended. I see no reason
why I should not use the same example to illustrate
this point that has been used by practically all my
predecessors. Orestes has killed his mother the
fact is admitted. He pleads that he was justified in
so doing the basis will be one of quality, the
question, whether he was justified in his action, the
line of defence that Clytemnestra killed her husband,
Orestes' father. This is called the or motive. The point for the decision of the judge is known as
the and in this case is whether it was
right that even a guilty mother should be killed by
her son. Some have drawn a distinction between and making mean the cause of the
trial, namely the murder of Clytemnestra, the
motive urged in defence, namely the murder of
Agamemnon. But there is such lack of agreement
over these two words, that some make the cause
of the trial and the motive of the deed, while
others reverse the meanings. If we turn to Latin
writers we find that some have given these causes the
names of initinum, the beginning, and ratio, the reason,
while others give the same name to both. Moreover
cause seems to spring from cause, or as the Greeks say as will be seen from the following
Clytemnestra killed Agamemnon, because he had
sacrificed their daughter and brought home a captive
woman as his paramour. The same authors think
that there may be several lines of defence to one
question for instance Orestes may urge that he
killed his mother because driven to do so by oracles.
But the number of points for the decision of the judge
will be the same as the number of alleged motives for
the deed in this case it will be whether he ought to
have obeyed the oracles. But one alleged motive may
also in my opinion involve several questions and several
points for the decision of the judge, as for instance
in the case when the husband caught his wife in
adultery and slew her and later slew the adulterer,
who had escaped, in the market place. The motive is
but one But there arise
as questions and points for decision by the judge, whether it was lawful to kill him at that time and at that
place. But just as, although there be several questions,
each with its special basis, the basis of the case is but
one, namely that to which all else is referred, even so
the real point for the decision of the judge is, strictly
speaking, that on which judgment is given. As for
the the central argument, as I have mentioned
it is called by some, or the foundation as it is called by
others, or as Cicero styles it the strongest argument of
the defender and the most relevant to the decision of the
judge, some regard it as being the point after which
all enquiry ceases, others as the main point for
adjudication. The motive of the deed does not arise
in all controversial cases. For how can there be a
motive for the deed, when the deed is denied But
when the motive for the deed does come up for
discussion, they deny that the point for the decision of
the judge rests on the same ground as the main question
at issue, and this view is maintained by Cicero in his
Rhetorica and Partitiones. For when it has been
asserted and denied that a deed was done, the question whether it was done is resolved by conjecture, and
the decision of the judge and the main question rest on
the same ground, since the first question and the
final decision are concerned with the same point.
But when it is stated and denied that Orestes was
justified in killing his mother, considerations of quality
are introduced the question is whether he was justified in killing her, but this is not yet the point for the
decision of the judge. When, then, does it become so The
point for the decision of the judge is whether it was his
duty to kill her. As regards the foundation, I will put it in the words of Cicero himself Others again use illustrations such as the following The
question is whether everyone that spends his patrimony
is to be prohibited, while the point for decision is
whether he who spent it in such a way is to be
prohibited. Or again take the case of the soldier
Arruntius, who killed the tribune Lusius for assaulting
his honour. The question is whether he was justified
in so doing, the line of defence, that the murdered man
made an assault upon his honour, the point for the
decision of the judge, whether it was right that a man
should be killed uncondemned or a tribune by a
soldier. Some even regard the basis of the question
as being different from the basis of the decision.
The question as to whether Milo was justified in
killing Clodius, is one of quality. The point for the
decision of the judge, namely whether Clodius lay in
wait for Milo, is a matter for conjecture. They also
urge that a case is often diverted to the consideration
of some matter irrelevant to the question, and that it is
on this matter that judgment is given. I strongly
disagree. Take the question whether all who have
spent their patrimony are to be prohibited from
addressing the people. This question must have its
point for decision, and therefore the question and the
point for decision are not different, but there are more than one question and more than one point for decision
in the case. Again, in the case of Milo, is not the
question of fact ultimately referred to the question of
quality For if Clodius lay in wait for Milo, it follows
that he was justifiably killed. But when the case is
shifted to some other point far removed from the
original question, even in this case the question will
be found to reside in the point for decision. As regards these questions Cicero is slightly inconsistent with himself. For in the Rhetorica, as I
have already mentioned, he followed Hermagoras,
while in the Topicai he holds that the or
disputed point is originated by the basis, and in
addressing the lawyer Trebatius on this subject he
calls it the point at issue, and describes the elements
in which it resides as central arguments or foundations
of the defence which hold it together and the removal of
which causes the whole defence to fall to the ground. But
in the Partitiones Oratoriae he gives the name of
foundation to that which is advanced against the defence, on the ground that the central argument, as it
logically comes first, is put forward by the accuser,
while the line of defence is put forward by the accused,
and the point for the decision of the judge arises from
the question jointly raised by the central argument
and the line of defence. The view therefore of those who make the basis,
the central argument, and the point for the decision of
the judge identical, is at once more concise and nearer
to the truth. The central argument, they point out,
is that the removal of which makes the whole case fall
to the ground. In this central argument they seem to
me to have included both the alleged causes, that Orestes killed his mother and that Clytemnestra
killed Agamemnon. the same authorities have likewise always held that the basis and the point for the
decision of the judge are in agreement; any other
opinion would have been inconsistent with their
general views. But this affectation of subtlety in the invention of
technical terms is mere laborious ostentation I have
undertaken the task of discussing them solely that I
might not be regarded as having failed to make sufficient inquiry into the subject which I have chosen as
my theme. But it is quite unnecessary for an instructor proceeding on less technical lines to destroy
the coherence of his teaching by attention to such
minute detail. Many however suffer from this drawback, more especially Hermagoras who, although he
labours these points with such anxious diligence, was
a man of penetrating intellect and in most respects
deserves our admiration, so that even where we must
needs blame him, we cannot withhold a certain meed
of praise. But the shorter method, which for that
very reason is also by far the most lucid, will not
fatigue the learner by leading him through a maze of
detail, nor destroy the coherence of his eloquence by
breaking it up into a number of minute departments.
For he who has a clear view of the main issue of a dispute, and divines the aims which his own side and his
opponents intend to follow and the means they intend
to employ and it is to the intentions of his own side
that he must pay special attention, will without a
doubt be in possession of a knowledge of all the points
which I have discussed above. And there is hardly
anyone, unless he be a born fool without the least
acquaintance with the practice of speaking, who does not know what is the main issue of a dispute or as
they call it the cause or central argument and what is
the question between the parties and the point on which
the judge has to decide, these three being identical.
For the question is concerned with the matter in dispute and the decision of the judge is given on the
point involved in the question. Still we do not keep
our attention rigidly fixed on such details, but the
desire to win praise by any available means and the
sheer delight in speaking make us wander away from
the subject, since there is always richer material for
eloquence outside the strict theme of the case, inasmuch as the points of any given dispute are always
few, and there is all the world outside, and in the one
case we speak according to our instructions, in the
other on the subjects of our own choice. We should
teach not so much that it is our duty to discover the
question, the central argument, and the point for the decision of the judge an easy task, as that we should
continually keep our attention on our subject, or if
we digress, at least keep looking back to it, lest in
our desire to win applause we should let our weapons
drop from our grasp. The school of Theodorus, as I
have said, groups everything under heads, by which
they mean several things. First they mean the main
question, which is to be identified with the basis;
secondly they mean the other questions dependent
on the main question, thirdly the proposition and the
statement of the proofs. The word is used as we use it
when we say or, as Menander says, But generally
speaking, anything which has to be proved will be a
head of varying degrees of importance. I have now set forth the principles laid down by
the writers of text-books, though I have done so
at a greater length than was necessary. I have
also explained what are the various parts of forensic
causes. My next book therefore shall deal with
the exordium. div1