The student who desires to give a wider consideration to figures of thought and speech will,
therefore, have a guide to follow, and 1 would not
venture to assert that he could have a better. But
I would ask him to read these passages of Cicero with
reference to my own views on this subject. For I
intend to speak only of those figures of thought
which depart from the direct method of statement,
and I note that a similar procedure has been adopted
by a number of learned scholars. On the other hand,
all those embellishments which differ in character
from these are none the less virtues whose importance is such that without them all oratory will be
little less than unintelligible. For how can the judge
be adequately instructed unless lucidity characterise
our performance of the following tasks explanation,
proposition, promise of proofs, definition, distinction,
exposition of our own opinion, logical conclusion, defence by anticipation, introduction of comparisons or
precedents, disposition and distribution, interruption,
repression of those who interrupt us, antithesis, exculpation and personal attack Again, what would
eloquence do if deprived of the artifices of amplification and its opposite of which the first requires the
gift of signifying more than we say, that is emphasis,
together with exaggeration and overstatement of the
truth, while the latter requires the power to diminish
and palliate. What scope is there for the stronger
emotions if the orator is not allowed to give free rein to his speech, to flame out in anger, to reproach, to
wish or execrate Or for the milder emotions without the assistance of commendation, conciliation and
humour What pleasure can an orator hope to produce, or what impression even of the most moderate
learning, unless he knows how to fix one point in the
minds of the audience by repetition, and another by
dwelling on it, how to digress from and return to his
theme, to divert the blame from himself and transfer
it to another, or to decide what points to omit and
what to ignore as negligible It is qualities such as
these that give life and vigour to oratory; without
them it lies torpid like a body lacking the breath to
stir its limbs. But more than the mere possession of
these qualities is required; they must be deployed,
each in their proper place and with such variety that
every sound may bewitch the hearer with all the
charm of music. But these qualities are as a rule
open and direct, manifesting themselves without
disguise. They do, however, as I have said, admit
of figures, as the instances to which I shall proceed
will show. What is more common than to ask or enquire
For both terms are used indifferently, although the
one seems to imply a desire for knowledge, and the
other a desire to prove something. But whichever
term we use, the thing which they represent admits
a variety of figures. We will begin with those which
serve to increase the force and cogency of proof to
which I assign the first place. A simple question
may be illustrated by the line On the other hand, a question involves a figure, whenever it is employed not to get information, but
to emphasise our point, as in the following examples and and with the
whole passage that follows. How much greater is
the fire of his words as they stand than if he had
said, and We may also
ask what cannot be denied, as Or we may put a question to which it is difficult to
reply, as in the common forms, Or we may ask a question
with a view to throw odium on the person to whom
it is addressed, as in the words placed by Seneca in
the mouth of Medea Or our aim may be to excite pity, as is the case with
the question asked by Sinon in Virgil Or to embarrass our opponent and to deprive him of
the power to feign ignorance of our meaning, as
Asinius does in the following sentence In fact questions admit of infinite variety. They
may serve our indignation, as in the line Or they may still express wonder, as in Again, at times they may express a sharp command,
as in Or we may ask ourselves, as in the phrase of Terence, A figure is also involved
in a reply, when one question is asked and another
is answered, because it suits the respondent's purpose
better to do so, or because it aggravates the charge
brought against the accused. For example, a witness
for the prosecution was asked whether he had been
cudgelled by the plaintiff, and replied, Or the purpose
may be to elude a charge, a very common form of
reply. The advocate says, The accused replies, The advocate asks, The accused replies, Again, the
answer may be of such a kind as to make defence
precede confession. For example, in the Eclogues
of Virgil, when one shepherd asks the other replies Akin to this kind of answer is the dissimulatory reply, which is employed solely with the purpose
of raising a laugh, and has therefore been treated
in its appropriate place. If it were meant seriously,
it would be tantamount to a confession. Further,
there is the practice of putting the question and
answering it oneself, which may have quite a pleasing
effect. Take as an example the following passage
from the pro Ligario, where Cicero says, A different
form of fictitious question is to be found in the pro
Caelio. with the whole passage that follows.
Then comes his reply, A different
method is to ask a question and not to wait for a
reply, but to subjoin the reply at once yourself.
For example, This is a figure which some call
suggestion. Again, a question may involve comparison,
as, for instance, There are
other forms of question as well, some concise, some
developed at greater length, some dealing with one
thing only, others with several.
Anticipation, or, as the Greeks call it, whereby we forestall objections, is of extraordinary
value in pleading; it is frequently employed in all
parts of a speech, but is especially useful in the
exordium. However, it forms a genus in itself, and has several different species. One of these is the
defence by anticipation, such as Cicero employs
against Quintus Caecilius, where he points out that
though previously he himself has always appeared
for the defence, he is now undertaking a prosecution.
Another is a form of confession, such as he introduces
in his defence of Rabirius Postumus, where he
admits that he himself regards his client as worthy
of censure for lending money to the king. Another
takes the form of prediction, as in the phrase, Again, there is a form of self-correction,
such as, And, most frequent of all, there
is preparation, whereby we state fully why we are
going to do something or have done it. Anticipation
may also be employed to establish the meaning or
propriety of words, as in the following case, while the same effect may be produced
by qualification, as in the following sentence, Again, hesitation may lend an impression of truth
to our statements, when, for example, we pretend
to be at a loss, where to begin or end, or to decide
what especially requires to be said or not to be said
at all. All speeches are full of such instances, but
for the present one will be enough. This device may also be employed
to cover the past; for we may equally pretend that
we had felt hesitation on the subject.
This figure is akin to that known as communication, when we actually take our opponents into consultation, as Domitius Afer does in his defence of Cloatilla. Or we may admit the
judges to our deliberations, a device which is frequently called into play. We may say, or, or, Cato, for example, says, And in another passage, Sometimes, however, in such forms
of communication we may add something unexpected,
a device which is in itself a figure, as Cicero does in
the Verrines Then, after keeping the minds of the judges in
suspense for a considerable time, he adds something
much worse. This figure is termed suspension by
Celsus. It has two forms. For we may adopt
exactly the opposite procedure to that just mentioned,
and after raising expectation of a sequel of the most
serious nature, we may drop to something which is
of a trivial character, and may even imply no offence
at all. But since this does not necessarily involve
any form of communication, some have given it the
name of paradox or surprise. I do not agree with
those who extend the name of figure to a statement
that something has happened unexpectedly to the speaker himself, like the following passage from
Pollio The figure
known as concession springs from practically the same
source as communication; it occurs when we leave
some things to the judgment of the jury, or even
in some cases of our opponents, as when Calvus
says to Vatinius, The figures best adapted for intensifying emotion
consist chiefly in simulation. For we may feign
that we are angry, glad, afraid, filled with wonder,
grief or indignation, or that we wish something, and
so on. Hence we get passages like the following or, or, or, or, or, To this some give the name of exclamation, and
include it among figures of speech. When, however,
such exclamations are genuine, they do not come
under the head of our present topic it is only those
which are simulated and artfully designed which can
with any certainty be regarded as figures. The same
is true of free speech, which Corificius calls licence,
and the Greeks For what has less of the
figure about it than true freedom On the other
hand, freedom of speech may frequently be made a cloak for flattery. For when Cicero in his defence
for Ligarius says, he has in his mind
something more than a desire to serve the interests
of Ligarius, for there is no better way of praising
the clemency of the victor. On the other hand, in
the sentence, he succeeds with admirable art in representing the cause of both parties as being good, and
in so doing mollifies him whose cause was really
bad.
A bolder form of figure, which in Cicero's opinion demands greater effort, is impersonation, or This is a device which lends wonderful variety and
animation to oratory. By this means we display the
inner thoughts of our adversaries as though they were
talking with themselves but we shall only carry conviction if we represent them as uttering what they
may reasonably be supposed to have had in their
minds; or without sacrifice of credibility we may
introduce conversations between ourselves and others,
or of others among themselves, and put words of
advice, reproach, complaint, praise or pity into the
mouths of appropriate persons. Nay, we are even
allowed in this form of speech to bring down the
gods from heaven and raise the dead, while cities
also and peoples may find a voice. There are some
authorities who restrict the term imepersonation to
cases where both persons and words are fictitious, and
prefer to call imaginary conversations between men
by the Greek name of dialogue, which some translate by the Latin semnocinatio. For my own part, I have
included both under the same generally accepted
term, since we cannot imagine a speech without we
also imagine a person to utter it. But when we lend
a voice to things to which nature has denied it, we
may soften down the figure in the way illustrated
by the following passage A bolder
figure of the same kind may be illustrated by the
following It is also convenient at times to pretend that we have before our
eyes the images of things, persons or utterances, or
to marvel that the same is not the case with our
adversaries or the judges; it is with this design that
we use phrases such as or But such devices make a great
demand on our powers of eloquence. For with things
which are false and incredible by nature there are but
two alternatives either they will move our hearers
with exceptional force because they are beyond the
truth, or they will be regarded as empty nothings
because they are not the truth. But we may introduce not only imaginary sayings, but imaginary
writings as well, as is done by Asinius in his defence
of Liburnia This is in itself a figure,
and is doubly so whenever, as in the present case, it imitates a document produced by the opposing
party. For a will had been read out by the prosecution, in the following form In this case the figure borders on
parody, a name drawn from songs sung in imitation
of others, but employed by an abuse of language to
designate imitation in verse or prose. Again, we
often personify the abstract, as Virgil does with
Fame, or as Xenophon records that Prodicus did
with Virtue and Pleasure, or as Ennius does when,
in one of his satires, he represents Life and Death
contending with one another. We may also introduce some imaginary person without identifying
him, as we do in the phrases, or, Or
speech may be inserted without any mention of the
speaker, as in the line This involves a mixture of figures, since to impersonalion we add the figure known as ellipse, which
in this case consists in the omission of any indication
as to who is speaking. At times impersonation takes
the form of narrative. Thus we find indirect
speeches in the historians, as at the opening of
Livy's first book Apostrophe also, which consists in the diversion of
our address from the judge, is wonderfully stirring,
whether we attack our adversary as in the passage, or turn to make some invocation such as, or to entreaty that will bring odium on
our opponents, as in the cry, But the term apostrophe is also
applied to utterances that divert the attention of
the hearer from the question before them, as in the
following passage There are a number of different figures by which
this effect may be produced. We may, for instance,
pretend that we expected something different or
feared some greater disaster, or that the judges in
their ignorance of the facts may regard some point
as of more importance than it really is an example
of this latter device is to be found in the exordium
to Cicero's defence of Caelius. With regard to the figure which Cicero calls ocular
denonstration, this comes into play when we do not
restrict ourselves to mentioning that something was
done, but proceed to show how it was done, and do
so not merely on broad general lines, but in full
detail. In the last book I classified this figure
under the head of vivid illustration, while Celsus
actually terms it by this name. Others give the
name of to any representation of facts
which is made in such vivid language that they
appeal to the eye rather than the ear. The following will show what I mean Nor is it only past or present actions
which we may imagine we may equally well present
a picture of what is likely to happen or might have
happened. This is done with extraordinary skill by
Cicero in his defence of Milo, where he shows
what Clodius would have done, had he succeeded
in securing the praetorship. But this transference
of time, which is technically called was
more modestly used in vivid description by the old
orators. For they would preface it by words such
as  take, for example,
the words of Cicero Modern authors, however, more especially
the declaimers, are bolder, indeed they show the
utmost animation in giving rein to their imagination;
witness the following passages from Seneca's treatment of the controversial theme in which a father,
guided by one of his sons, finds another son in the
act of adultery with his stepmother and kills both
culprits. And a little
later, This figure is too dramatic
for the story seems to be acted, not narrated. Some
include the clear and vivid description of places
under the same heading, while others call it
topography. I have found some who speak of irony as dissimulation, but, in view of the fact that this latter name does not cover the whole range of this figure, I shall
follow my general rule and rest content with the
Greek term. Irony involving a figure does not differ
from the irony which is a trope, as far as its genus is
concerned, since in both cases we understand something which is the opposite of what is actually said;
on the other hand, a careful consideration of the
species of irony will soon reveal the fact that they
differ. In the first place, the trope is franker in its
meaning, and, despite the fact that it implies something other than it says, makes no pretence about it.
For the context as a rule is perfectly clear, as, for
example, in the following passage from the Catilinarian orations. In this case the irony lies in two words,
and is therefore a specially concise form of trope.
But in the figurative form of irony the speaker disguises his entire meaning, the disguise being apparent
rather than confessed. For in the trope the conflict
is purely verbal, while in the figure the meaning, and
sometimes the whole aspect of our case, conflicts with
the language and the tone of voice adopted; nay, a
man's whole life may be coloured with irony, as was
the case with Socrates, who was called an ironist
because he assumed the role of an ignorant man lost
in wonder at the wisdom of others. Thus, as continued metaphor develops into allegory, so a sustained
series of tropes develops into this figure. There are,
however, certain kinds of this figure which have no
connexion with tropes. In the first place, there is the
figure which derives its name from negation and is
called by some Here is an example
; or again, or ; or ; or Such kinds of
irony may even be sustained at times through whole
sections of our argument, as, for instance, where
Cicero says, It is also irony
when we assume the tone of command or concession,
as in Virgil's or when we concede to our opponents qualities which
we are unwilling that they should seem to possess.
This is specially effective when we possess these
qualities and they do not, as in the following
passage, A like result is produced by reversing this method
when we pretend to own to faults which are not ours
or which even recoil upon the heads of our opponents, as for example, Further, this device of saying the opposite of what we desire to imply is not merely restricted to persons, but may be extended to things, witness the
whole of the exordium of the pro Ligario and disparaging phrases such as or Another example is provided by the following passage from the pro Oppio, Akin to irony
also are the following figures, which have a strong
family resemblance confession of a kind that can do
our case no harm, such as the following ; secondly, concession, when we pretend to admit something actually
unfavourable to ourselves by way of showing our
confidence in our cause, as in the following passage
; or again, in the pro
Cluentio, where Cicero is speaking of the prejudice
aroused against his client, ;
thirdly, agreement, as when Cicero, in the same
speech, agrees that the jury was bribed. This last
form offigure becomes more striking when we agree
to something which is really likely to tell in our
favour; but such an opportunity can only occur
through weakness on the part of our opponent
Sometimes we may even praise some action of our
opponent, as Cicero does in his prosecution of Verres
when dealing with the charge in connexion with Apollonius of Drepanum At times we may exaggerate charges against
ourselves which we can easily refute or deny; this
device is too common to require any illustration. At
other times we may by this same method make the
charges brought against us seem incredible just
because of their gravity thus Cicero in his defence
of Roscius, by the sheer force of his eloquence,
exaggerates the horror of parricide, despite the fact
that it requires no demonstration. Aposiopesis, which Cicero calls reticentia, Celsus
obticentia, and some interruptio, is used to indicate
passion or anger, as in the line Or it may serve to give an impression of anxiety or
scruple, as in the following There is a similar instance
in the exordium of Demosthenes' speech in defence
of Ctesiphon. Again it may be employed as a means
of transition, as, for example, This last instance also
involves digression, if indeed digression is to be
counted among figures, since some authorities regard
it as forming one of the parts of a speech. For at this point the orator diverges to sing the praises of
Gnaeus Pompeius, which he might have done without any recourse to aposiopesis. For as Cicero says,
the shorter form of digression may be effected in a
number of different ways. The following passages
will, however, suffice as examples the
second is from the pro Milone There is also another kind of figure,
which is not aposiopesis, since that involves leaving
a sentence unfinished, but consists in bringing our
words to a close before the natural point for their
conclusion. The following is an example ; or The imitation of other persons' characteristics,
which is styled or, as some prefer may be counted among the devices which serve to
excite the gentler emotions. For it consists mainly
in banter, though it may be concerned either with
words or deeds. If concerned with the latter, it
closely resembles while the following
passage from Terence will illustrate it as applied
to words We may, however, imitate our own
words and deeds in a similar fashion by relating some act or statement, though in such cases the speaker
more frequently does so to assert his point than for
the sake of banter, as, for example, in the following, There are other devices also which
are agreeable in themselves and serve not a little
to commend our case both by the introduction of
variety and by their intrinsic naturalness, since by
giving our speech an appearance of simplicity and
spontaneity they make the judges more ready to
accept our statements without suspicion. Thus we
may feign repentance for what we have said, as in
the pro Caelio, where Cicero says, Or we may
use some common phrase, such as, Or we may pretend that we are
searching for what we should say, as in the phrases, or Or we may pretend to discover something
suggested by the context, as when Cicero says, or Such
methods will also provide us with elegant transitions,
although transition is not itself to be ranked among
figures for example, Cicero, after telling the story
of Piso, who ordered a goldsmith to make a ring
before him in court, adds, as though this story had
suggested it to him, Or we may affect ignorance on certain
points, as in the following passage This device
may serve for other purposes as well. For there
are means of this kind whereby we may achieve
an end quite other than that at which we appear
to be aiming, as, for example, Cicero does in the
passage just quoted. For while he taunts Verres
with a morbid passion for acquiring statues and
pictures, he succeeds in creating the impression
that he personally has no interest in such subjects.
So, too, when Demosthenes swears by those who
fell at Marathon and Salamis, his object is to lessen
the odium in which he was involved by the disaster
at Chaeronea. We may further lend charm to our
speech by deferring the discussion of some points
after just mentioning them, thus depositing them
in the safe keeping of the judge's memory and afterwards reclaiming our deposit; or we may employ
some figure to enable us to repeat certain points
for repetition is not in itself a figure or may make
especial mention of certain things and vary the
aspect of our pleading. For eloquence delights
in variety, and just as the eye is more strongly
attracted by the sight of a number of different
things, so oratory supplies a continuous series of
novelties to rivet the attention of the mind. Emphasis may be numbered among figures also,
when some hidden meaning is extracted from some
phrase, as in the following passage from Virgil For although Dido complains of marriage, yet her passionate outburst shows that she regards life without wedlock as no life for man, but for the beasts
of the field. A different kind of emphasis is found
in Ovid, where Zmyrna confesses to her nurse her
passion for her father in the following words Similar, if not identical with this figure is another,
which is much in vogue at the present time. For
I must now proceed to the discussion of a class of
figure which is of the commonest occurrence and
on which I think I shall be expected to make
some comment. It is one whereby we excite some
suspicion to indicate that our meaning is other than
our words would seem to imply; but our meaning
is not in this case contrary to that which we express,
as is the case in ironq, but rather a hidden meaning
which is left to the hearer to discover. As I have
already pointed out, modern rhetoricians practically
restrict the name of figure to this device, from the
use of which figured controversial themes derive
their name. This class of figure may be employed under three conditions first, if it is unsafe
to speak openly; secondly, if it is unseemly to speak
openly; and thirdly, when it is employed solely
with a view to the elegance of what we say, and
gives greater pleasure by reason of the novelty and
variety thus introduced than if our meaning had
been expressed in straightforward language. The first of the three is of common occurrence in
the schools, where we imagine conditions laid down
by tyrants on abdication and decrees passed by the
senate after a civil war, and it is a capital offence
to accuse a person with what is past, what is not expedient in the courts being actually prohibited
in the schools. But the conditions governing the
employment of figures differ in the two cases. For
we may speak against the tyrants in question as
openly as we please without loss of effect, provided always that what we say is susceptible of a
different interpretation, since it is only danger to
ourselves, and not offence to them, that we have to
avoid. And if the danger can be avoided by any
ambiguity of expression, tile speaker's cunning will
meet with universal approbation. On the other
hand, the actual business of the courts has never
yet involved such necessity for silence, though at
times they require something not unlike it, which
is much more embarrassing for the speaker, as, for
example, when he is hampered by the existence of
powerful personages, whom he must censure if
he is to prove his case. Consequently he must
proceed with greater wariness and circumspection;
since the actual manner in which offence is given
is a matter of indifference, and if a figure is perfectly
obvious, it ceases to be a figure. Therefore such
devices are absolutely repudiated by some authorities, whether the meaning of the figure be intelligible or not. But it is possible to employ such
figuress in moderation, the primary consideration
being that they should not be too obvious. And
this fault can be avoided, if the figre does not
depend on the employment of words of doubtful
or double meaning, such, for instance, as the words
which occur in the theme of the suspected daughter-in-law It is important, too, that the figure should not depend on ambiguous collocations of words a
trick which is far more foolish than the last; an
example of this is to be found in the controversial
theme, where a father, accused of a criminal passion
for his unmarried daughter, asks her for the name
of her ravisher. he says.
She replies The facts themselves must be allowed to excite the
suspicions of the judge, and we must clear away all
other points, leaving nothing save what will suggest
the truth. In doing this we shall find emotional
appeals, hesitation and words broken by silences
most effective. For thus the judge will be led to
seek out the secret which he would not perhaps
believe if he heard it openly stated, and to believe
in that which he thinks he has found out for himself.
But however excellent our figures, they must not be
too numerous. For overcrowding will make them
obvious, and they will become ineffective without
becoming inoffensive, while the fact that we make
no open accusation will seem to be due not to
modesty, but to lack of confidence in our own cause.
In fact, we may sum up the position thus our
figures will have most effect upon the judge when
he thinks that we use them with reluctance. I
myself have come across persons whom it was impossible to convince by other means I have even
come across a much rarer thing, namely, a case
which could only be proved by recourse to such
devices. I was defending a woman who was alleged
to have forged her husband's will, and the heirs
were stated to have given a bond to the husband
on his deathbed, which latter assertion was true.
For since the wife could not legally be appointed his heir, this procedure was adopted to enable the
property to be transferred to her by a secret conveyance in trust. Now it was easy for me to secure
the woman's acquittal, by openly mentioning the
existence of the bond; but this would have involved
her loss of the inheritance. I had, therefore, to plead
in such a way that the judges should understand that
the bond had actually been given, but that informers
might be unable to avail themselves of any statement of mine to that effect. And I was successful
in both my aims. The fear of seeming to boast my
own skill would have deterred me from mentioning
this case, but for the fact that I wished to demonstrate that there was room for the employment of
these figures even in the courts. Some things,
again, which cannot be proved, may, on the other
hand, be suggested by the employment of some
figure. For at times such hidden shafts will stick,
and the fact that they are not noticed will prevent
their being drawn out, whereas if the same point
were stated openly, it would be denied by our
opponents and would have to be proved. When, however, it is respect for some person that
hampers us which I mentioned as the second condition under which such figures may be used, all
the greater caution is required because the sense of
shame is a stronger deterrent to all good men than
fear. In such cases the judge must be impressed
with the fact that we are hiding what we know and
keeping back the words which our natural impulse
to speak out the truth would cause to burst from
our lips. For those against whom we are speaking,
together with the judges and our audience, would assuredly be all the more incensed by such toying
with detraction, if they thought that we were
inspired by deliberate malice. And what difference
does it make how we express ourselves, when both
the facts and our feelings are clearly understood
And what good shall we do by expressing ourselves thus except to make it clear that we are
doing what we ourselves know ought not to be done
And yet in the days when I first began to teach
rhetoric, this failing was only too common. For
declaimers selected by preference those themes
which attracted them by their apparent difficulty,
although as a matter of fact they were much easier
than many others. For straightforward eloquence
requires the highest gifts to commend itself to
the audience, while these circuitous and indirect
methods are merely the refuge of weakness, for those
who use them are like men who, being unable to
escape from their pursuers by speed, do so by
doubling, since this method of expression, which
is so much affected, is really not far removed from
jesting. Indeed it is positively assisted by the
tact that the hearer takes pleasure in detecting
the speaker's concealed meaning, applauds his own
penetration and regards another man's eloquence as
a compliment to himself. Consequently it was not
merely in cases where respect for persons prevented
direct speaking a circumstance which as a rule calls
for caution rather than figures that they would
have recourse to figurative methods, but they made
room for them even under circumstances where they
were useless or morally inadmissible, as for example
in a case where a father, who had secretly slain his
son whom he suspected of incest with his mother, and was accused of ill-treating his wife, was made to
bring indirect insinuations against his wife. But
what could be more discreditable to the accused than
that he should have kept such a wife What could
be more damaging than that he who is accused
because he appears to have harboured the darkest
suspicions against his wife, should by his defence
confirm the charge which he is required to refute
If such speakers had only placed themselves in the
position of the judges, they would have realised how
little disposed they would have been to put up with
pleading on such lines, more especially in cases
where the most abominable crimes were insinuated
against parents. However, since we have lighted on this topic, let
us devote a little more time to considering the
practice of the schools. For it is in the schools that
the orator is trained, and the methods adopted in
pleading ultimately depend on the methods employed
in declamation. I must therefore say something
of those numerous cases in which figures have been
employed which were not merely harsh, but actually
contrary to the interests of the case. Everyone who pleaded for the
father indulged in figurative insinuations against the
son, on the assumption that the father would, when
tortured, be likely to name him as one of his accomplices. But what could be more foolish For as soon as the judges grasp their point, they will either
refuse to put him to the torture in view of his
motive for desiring to be tortured, or will refuse to
believe any confession he may make under torture.
But, it will be urged, it is possible that this was his
motive. May be. But he should then disguise his
motive, in order that he may effect his purpose.
But what will it profit us and by us I mean
the declaimers to have realised this motive, unless
we declare it as well Well, then, if the case
were being actually pleaded in the courts, should we
have disclosed this secret motive in such a way
Again, if this is not the real motive, the condemned
man may have other reasons for opposing his son;
he may think that the law should be carried out
or be unwilling to accept such a kindness from the
hands of his accuser, or and this is the line on which
I personally should insist he may intend to persist
in declaring his innocence even under torture.
Consequently the usual excuse advanced by such
declaimers to the effect that the inventor of the
theme meant the defence to proceed on these lines,
will not always serve their purpose. It is possible
that this was not the inventor's wish. However, let
us assume that it was. Are we then to speak like
fools merely because he thought like a fool Personally I hold that, even in actual cases, we should
often disregard the wishes of the litigant. Further,
in such cases speakers fall into the frequent error of
assuming that certain persons say one thing and
mean another this is more especially the case where
it is assumed that a man asks permission to die.
Take, for example, the following controversial theme. they say, For my part, I laugh at the fears which they manifest
on his behalf, as though they were in peril of death
themselves, and at the way in which they allow their
terror to influence their line of pleading; for they
forget how many precedents there are for suicide
and how many reasons there may be why a hero
turned deserter should wish for death. But it would
be waste of time to expatiate on one controversial
theme. I would lay it down as a general rule that an
orator should never put forward a plea that is tantamount to collusion, and I cannot imagine a lawsuit
arising in which both parties have the same design,
nor conceive that any man who wishes to live could
be such a fool as to put forward an absurd plea for
death, when he might refrain from pleading for it at
all. I do not, however, deny that there are controversial themes of this kind where figures may
legitimately be employed, as, for example, the
following For in this case he does not pardon his son
entirely, but cannot openly withdraw the evidence
that he gave in the first trial, and while he does not
inflict any worse penalty than disinheritance, he does
not shrink from that. Further, the employment of
the figure tells more heavily against the father than
is fair and less against the son. But, while no one
ever speaks against the view which he wishes to
prevail, he may wish something of greater importance than what he actually says. Thus the
disinherited son who asks his father to take back
another son whom he had exposed, and who had
been brought up by himself, on payment for his
maintenance, while he may prefer that he himself
should be reinstated, may all the same be perfectly
sincere in his demand on behalf of his brother.
Again, a kind of tacit hint may be employed, which,
while demanding the utmost rigour of the law from
the judges, suggests a loophole for clemency, not
openly, for that would imply a pledge on our part,
but by giving a plausible suspicion of our meaning.
This device is employed in a number of controversial
themes, among them the following. Here if the father pledges himself to
pardon him, the dispute falls to the ground. If, on
the other hand, he holds out no hope of pardon,
though he will not necessarily be regarded as mad,
he will certainly give the impression of cruelty and
will prejudice the judge against him. Latro therefore showed admirable skill when he made the son
say, and the father reply, The elder Gallio treats the theme
with greater tenderness, as was natural to a man of
his disposition. He makes the father say, Akin to this are those figures of
which the Greeks are so fond, by means of which
they give gentle expression to unpleasing facts.
Themistocles, for example, is believed to have urged
the Athenians to commit their city to the protection
of heaven, because to urge them to abandon it would
have been too brutal an expression. Again the
statesman who advised that certain golden images
of Victory should be melted down as a contribution
to the war funds, modified his words by saying that
they should make a proper use of their victories.
But all such devices which consist in saying one
thing, while intending something else to be understood, have a strong resemblance to allegory. It has also been asked how figures may best be
met. Some hold that they should always be
exposed by the antagonist, just as hidden ulcers
are laid open by the surgeon. It is true that
this is often the right course, being the only means
of refuting the charges which have been brought
against us, and this is more especially the case
when the question turns on the very point at which
the figures are directed. But when the figures are
merely employed as vehicles of abuse, it will sometimes even be wisest to show that we have a clear
conscience by ignoring them. Nay, even if too
many figures have been used to permit us to take
such a course, we may ask our opponents, if they have any confidence in the righteousness of their
cause, to give frank and open expression to the
charges which they have attempted to suggest by
indirect hints, or at any rate to refrain from asking
the judges not merely to understand, but even to
believe things which they themselves are afraid to
state in so many words. It may even at times be
found useful to pretend to misunderstand them; for
which we may compare the well known story of the
man who, when his opponent cried, replied that he was
ready to do so, whereupon the judge accepted the
proposal, much to the indignation of the advocate,
who protested that this would make the use of
figures absolutely impossible; we may therefore lay
it down as a general rule that such figures should
only be used with the utmost caution. There remains the third class of figure designed
merely to enhance the elegance of our style, for
which reason Cicero expresses the opinion that such
figures are independent of the subject in dispute.
As an illustration I may quote the figure which he
uses in his speech against Clodius Irony also is frequently employed in
this connexion. But by far the most artistic device is to indicate one thing by allusion to another; take
the case where a rival candidate speaks against an
ex-tyrant who had abdicated on condition of his
receiving an amnesty Another common device is to introduce an
oath, like the speaker who, in defending a disinherited man, cried, But this is not a figure which
is much to be recommended, for as a rule the
introduction of an oath, unless it is absolutely
necessary, is scarcely becoming to a self-respecting
man. Seneca made a neat comment to this
effect when he said that oaths were for the
witness and not for the advocate. Again, the
advocate who drags in an oath merely for the sake
of some trivial rhetorical effect, does not deserve
much credit, unless he can do this with the
masterly effect achieved by Demosthenes, which I
mentioned above. But by far the most trivial form
of figure is that which turns on a single word,
although we find such a figure directed against
Clodia by Cicero I note that comparison is also regarded as a figure,
although at times it is a form of proof, and at others
the whole case may turn upon it, while its form
may be illustrated by the following passage from the pro Murena and so on. I am not sure, however, whether it is so much a figure of thought as of
speech. For the only difference lies in the fact that
universals are not contrasted with universals, but
particulars with particulars. Celsus, however, and
that careful writer Visellius regard it as a figure of
thought, while Rutilius Lupus regards it as belonging
to both, and calls it antithesis. To the figures placed by Cicero among the ornaments of thought Rutilius following the views of
Gorgias, a contemporary, whose four books he
transferred to his own work, and who is not to be
confused with Georgias of Leontini and Celsus
who follows Rutilius would add a number of
others, such as concentration, which the Greek calls a term employed when a number of
different arguments are used to establish one point
consequence, which Gorgias calls and
which I have already discussed under the head
of argument inference, which Gorgias terms threats, that is, exhortation,
or But all of these are perfectly
straightforward methods of speaking, unless combined with some one of the figures which I have
discussed above. Besides these, Celsus considers
the following to be figures exclusion, asseveration,
refusal, excitement of the judge, the use of
proverbs, the employment of quotations from poetry,
jests, invidious remarks or invocation to intensify a
charge which is identical with  flattery, pardon, disdain, admonition, apology, entreaty and
rebuke. He even includes partition, proposition,
division and affinity between two separate things,
by which latter he means that two things
apparently different signify the same for example,
not only the man who murders another by administering a deadly draught is to be regarded as
a poisoner, but also the man who deprives another
of his wits by giving him some drug, a point which
depends on definition. To these Rutilius or
Gorgias add that is, the representation
of the necessity of a thing, or reminding, that is, replying to anticipated objections, or refutation, or
amplification, which means pointing out
what ought to have been done, and then what
actually has been done, or arguments
from opposites whence we get enthymemes styled
, and even which Hermagoras considers a basis. Visellius, although he
makes the number of figures but small, includes
among them the enthymeme, which he calls
commentum, and the epicheireme, which he calls ratio.
This view is also partially accepted by Celsus, who
is in doubt whether consequence is not to be identified with the epicheireme. Visellius also adds
general reflexions to the list. I find others who
would add to these or enhancement, or prohibition, and or
incidental narrative. But though these are not
figures, there may be others which have slipped
my notice, or are yet to be invented still, they
will be of the same nature as those of which I have
spoken above. III. Figures of speech have always been liable to
change and are continually in process of change in
accordance with the variations of usage. Consequently when we compare the language of our
ancestors with our own, we find that practically everything we say nowadays is figurative. For example,
we say invidere hac re for to instead of hanc rem, which was the idiom of all the
ancients, more especially Cicero, and incumbere illi
to lean upon him for incumbere in ilium, plenum vino
full of wine for plenum vini, and huic adulari to flatter
him for hunc adulari. I might quote a thousand
other examples, and only wish I could say that the
changes were not often changes for the worse. But
to proceed, figures of speech fall into two main
classes. One is defined as the form of language,
while the other is mainly to be sought in the
arrangement of words. Both are equally applicable
in oratory, but we may style the former rather more
grammatical and the latter more rhetorical.
The former originates from the same sources as
errors of language. For every figure of this kind
would be an error, if it were accidental and not
deliberate. But as a rule such figures are defended by
authority, age and usage, and not infrequently by some
reason as well. Consequently, although they involve
a divergence from direct and simple language, they
are to be regarded as excellences, provided always
that they have some praiseworthy precedent to
follow. They have one special merit, that they relieve the tedium of everyday stereotyped speech and
save us from commonplace language. If a speaker
use them sparingly and only as occasion demands,
they will serve as a seasoning to his style and increase its attractions. If, on the other hand, he
strains after them overmuch, he will lose that very
charm of variety which they confer. Some figures,
however, are so generally accepted that they have
almost ceased to be regarded as figures consequently
however frequently they may be used, they will
make less impression on the ear, just because it has
become habituated to them. For abnormal figures
lying outside the range of common speech, while
they are for that very reason more striking, and
stimulate the ear by their novelty, prove cloying if
used too lavishly, and make it quite clear that they
did not present themselves naturally to the speaker,
but were hunted out by him, dragged from obscure
corners and artificially piled together.
Figures, then, may be found in connexion with the
gender of nouns; for we find oculis capti talpale
blind moles and timidi damae timid deer in Virgil;
but there is good reason for this, since in these
cases both sexes are covered by a word of one gender,
and there is no doubt that there are male moles
and deer as well as female. Figures may also affect
verbs for example, we find such phrases as fabricatus
est glatdium or inimicum poenitus es. This is the less
surprising, since the nature of verbs is such that we
often express the active by the passive form, as in the
case of arbitror think and suspicor suspect, and
the passive by the active, as in the case of vapulo
am beaten. Consequently the interchange of the
two forms is of common occurrence, and in many
cases either form can be used for example, we may
say luxuriatur or luxuriat luxuriate, fluctuatur or
fluctuat fluctuate, adsentior or adsentio agree.
Figures also occur in connexion with number, as when the plural follows the singular, as in the
phrase gladio pugnacissima gens Romani the Romans
are a nation that fight fiercely with the sword; for
gens is a singular noun indicating multitude. Or the
singular may follow the plural, as in the following
instance, where etc., is included
among etc. In a
satire again we read, where the infinitive is used as a noun for the poet
by nostrum vivere means nostram vitam. We also at
times use the verb for the participle, as in the phrase, where ferre is used for ferendum, or the participle
may be used for the verb, as in the phrase volo datum
I wish to give. At times, again, there may be some doubt as
to the precise error which a figure resembles. Take,
for example, the phrase where the writer has either changed the parts of
speech making his phrase a variant for virtus est fuga vitiorum, or the cases in which case it will be
a variant for virtutis est vitium fugere; but whichever
be the case, the figure is far more vigorous than
either. At times figures are joined, as in Sthenelus
sciens pugnae, which is substituted for Sthenelus scilus
pugnandi. Tenses too are interchangeable. For
example, Timarchides negat esse ei periculum a seuri
the present negat is substituted for the past. Or
one mood may be used for another, as in the phrase,
hoc Ithacus velit. In fact, to cut a long matter short,
there is a figure corresponding to every form of
solecism. There is also a figure styled i.e. alteration of the normal idiom, which bears a strong
resemblance to For example, we find in
Sallust phrases such as neque ea res failsum me habuit
and duci probare. Such figures as a rule aim not
merely at novelty, but at conciseness as well.
Hence we get further developments, such as non
paeniturum for and visuros
for both found in the same author.
These may have been figures when Sallust made
them; but it is a question whether they can now be
so considered, since they have met with such general
acceptance. For we are in the habit of accepting
common parlance as sufficient authority where current
phrases are concerned for example, rebus agentibus
in the sense of while this was going on, which
Pollio rebukes Labienus for using, has become an
accredited idiom, as has contumeliam fecit, which, as is well known, is stigmatised by Cicero for in his day
they said ad fici contumelia. Figures may also be
commended by their antiquity, for which Virgil had
such a special passion. Compare his or Numerous instances of the same kind might be cited
from the old tragic and comic poets. One word of
this type has remained in common use, namely
enimvero. I might further quote from the same
author words which form the beginning of a speech or There the sentence inverts the natural order which
may be illustrated by quam magis aerumna urgent, tam
magis ad malefaciendumn viget. Old writers are full of such usages. At the beginning of the Eunuchus of Terence we have quid
igitur faciam, while another comic poet says ain
tandem leno Catullus in his Epithalamium writes where the first dum means while, and the second
means so long. Sallust, on the other hand, borrows
a number of idioms from the Greek, such as
vulgus amat fieri the same is true of Horace, who
strongly approves of the practice. Compare his Virgil does the same in phrases such as or saucius pectus , an idiom
which has now become familiar in the public gazette.
Under the same class of figure falls that of
addition, which, although the words added may be
strictly superfluous, may still be far from inelegant.
Take, for example, where the second nam might be omitted. And we
find in Horace, Similarly, words are omitted, a device which may be
either a blemish or a figure, according to the context.
The following is an example for the full phrase would be plus quam satis. There
is, however, another form of omission which requires
treatment at greater length. We frequently use the comparative for the
positive, as, for example, when a man speaks of
himself as being infirmior rather indisposed.
Sometimes we join two comparatives, as in the
following passage si te, Catilina, comprehend, si
interfici iussero, credo erit verendum mihi, ne non potius
hoc ones boni serius a me qam quisquam crudelius
factum esse dicat. There are also figures like the
following, which, though far from being solecisms,
alter the number and are also usually included
among tropes. We may speak of a single thing in
the plural, as in the following instance Or we may speak of the plural in the singular, as in
the following case There are others which belong to a diflfrent
species, but the same genus, such as or For in the first of these passages he is not advising
some other person, nor exhorting himself in the
second, his advice in both passages being meant for
all. Sometimes, again, we speak of ourselves as
though we were referring to others, as in phrases
like, At
other times we speak in the first person instead of
in another, or substitute one person for another.
Both devices are employed together in the pro
Caecina, where Cicero, addressing Piso, the counsel
for the prosecution, says, The actual truth is that
it was Aebutius who asserted that he had reinstated the defendant, and Caecina who denied that
he had been restored in accordance with the
praetor's edict. We may note also a further figure
of speech in the contracted dixti, which has dropped
one of its syllables. The following also may be regarded as belonging to the same genus. The first
is called interpositio or interclusio by us, and parenthesis
or paremptosis by the Greeks, and consists in the
interruption of the continuous flow of our language
by the insertion of some remark. The following
is an example ego cum te mecum enim saepissime
loquilur patriae reddidissem. To this they add
hyperbaton, which they refuse to include among
tropes. A second figure of this kind is one closely
resembling the figure of thought known as apostrophe,
but differing in this respect, that it changes the
form of the language and not the sense. The
following will illustrate my meaning There is a still more striking example in the passage
describing the death of Polydorus 'Those terminologists who delight in subtle distinctions call the last figure transition, and
hold that it may be employed in yet another way,
as in Dido's Virgil has combined apostrollphe and parenthesis in
the well-known passage These figures and the like, which consist in change,
addition, omission, and the order of words, serve to
attract the attention of the audience and do not
allow it to flag, rousing it from time to time by some
specially striking figure, while they derive something
of their charm from their very resemblance to
blemishes, just as a trace of bitterness in food will
sometimes tickle the palate. But this result will
only be obtained if figures are not excessive in
number nor all of the same type or combined or
closely packed, since economy in their use, no less
than variety, will prevent the hearer being surfeited. There is a more striking class of figure, which does
not merely depend on the form of the language for
its effect, but lends both charm and force to the
thought as well. The first figure of this class which
calls for notice is that which is produced by addition.
Of this there are various kinds. Words, for instance,
may be doubled with a view to amplification, as in where the first I have slain states what has been
done, while the second emphasises it, or to excite
pity, as in The same figure may also sometimes be employed
ironically, with a view to disparagement. Similar to
such doubling of words is repetition following a
parenthesis, but the effect is stronger. Again, a number of clauses may begin
with the same word for the sake of force and emphasis. Or
they may end with the same words. This last instance, however, comes under
the head of another figure as well, where both
opening and concluding words are identical, since
the sentences open with and end with Here is another example. Again, in antitheses and comparisons the first words of alternate phrases are
frequently repeated to produce correspondence,
which was my reason for saying a little while back
that this device came under the present topic rather
than that which I was then discussing. But the orator is not content with producing this effect, but proceeds to reverse the figure. A similar correspondence may be
produced between the middle and the opening of a
sentence, as in the line Or the middle may correspond to the end, as in the
following sentence Nor will it be questioned that a like effect may be
produced by the repetition of the middle of both
clauses. Again, the end may correspond with the
beginning. There is also
another form of repetition which simultaneously
reiterates things that have already been said, and
draws distinctions between them. This is styled by the Greeks and regression
by Roman writers. Nor are words only repeated to
reaffirm the same meaning, but the repetition may
serve to mark a contrast, as in the following sentence. At times the cases and genders of the
words repeated may be varied, as in ; a similar
instance is found in Rutilius, but in a long period.
I therefore merely cite the beginnings of the clauses.
Pater hic tuus patrem nunc appellas patris tui filius
es This figure may also be effected solely by
change of cases, a proceeding which the Greeks call It may also be produced in other ways,
as in the pro Cluentio Quod autem tempus veneni dandi
illo die illa frequentia per quem porro datum unde
sumptum quae porro interceptio poculi cur non de
integro autem datum The combination of different
details is called by Caecilius, and may be
exemplified by the following passage directed against
Oppianicus in the pro Cluentio with much more to the same effect. In this case the
details are massed together, but they may equally be
distributed or dissipated, as I think Cicero says. For
example with the remainder of the passage. A wonderful mixture of figures may be found in Cicero in the
following passage, where the first word is repeated
last after a long interval, while the middle corresponds with the beginning, and the concluding words
with the middle. This frequent repetition, which, as I have said, is
produced by a mixture of figures, is called by
the Greeks a letter of Cicero to Brutus will provide a further example. etc. The like effect may be produced
in the same sentence by repeating the same words
in different forms, as in Persius and in Cicero, where he says, Whole sentences again end
with the phrase with which they began. Take an
example. Nay, the first word of this same period is actually repeated at its close, thus making its third appearance
for to the words just quoted the orator adds, Sometimes a whole clause is
repeated, although the order of the words is altered,
as, for example, Quid Cleomenes facere potuit non
enin possum quemquam insimulare falso, quid, inquam, magno opere potuit Cleomenes facere The first word
of one clause is also frequently the same as the last
of the preceding, a figure common in poetry. But it is not uncommon even in the orators. For
example Sometimes, as I
remarked in connexion with the doubling of words,
the beginnings and the conclusions of sentences are
made to correspond by the use of other words with
the same meaning. Here is an example of correspondence between the beginnings An example of the
correspondence of conclusions is provided by another
passage in the same speech which follows close on
that just cited Some
call this synonzmy, others disjunction both terms,
despite their difference, are correct. For the words
are differentiated, but their meaning is identical.
Sometimes, again, words of the same meaning are
grouped together. For instance, Or take this example from another book of the
orations against Catiline, This is regarded as a case of pleonasm by Caecilius, that is to
say, as language fuller than is absolutely required,
like the phrase for is already implied by But
when such language is over weighted by some purely
superfluous addition, it is, as I have also pointed out
elsewhere, a fault; whereas when, as in this case, it
serves to make the sense stronger and more obvious,
it is a merit. are so many appeals to the emotion. I cannot
therefore see why Caecilius should have stigmatised
these words by such a name, since the doubling and
repetition of words and all forms of addition may likewise be regarded aspleonasms. And it is not merely
words that are thus grouped together. The same
device may be applied to thoughts of similar content. Words of different meaning may likewise be
grouped together, as for instance, ;
or again, as in the following passage from Ovid, I have found some who call this also by the name
of but I do not agree, as only one figure is involved. We may also find a mixture of words,
some identical and others different in meaning; of
this figure, which the Greeks style the
following will provide an example In this sentence and are different
in meaning, while and are similar in meaning to each other,
but different from the three previous. But both the
last example and the last but one involve a different
figure as well, which, owing to the absence of
connecting particles, is called dissolution asyndeton,
and is useful when we are speaking with special
vigour for it at once impresses the details on the
mind and makes them seem more numerous than
they really are. Consequently, we apply this
figure not merely to single words, but to whole
sentences, as, for instance, is done by Cicero in his
reply to the speech which Metellus made to
the public assembly while the rest of the passage is constructed
on similar lines. This kind of figure is also called
brachylogy, which may be regarded as detachment
without loss of connexion. The opposite of this
figure of asyndeton is polyxyndeton, which is characterised by the number of connecting particles employed.
In this figure we may repeat the same connecting
particle a number of times, as in the following instance or they may be different, as in the case of arma
virumque followed by multum ille et terris and multa
quoque. Adverbs and pronouns also may be varied,
as in the following instance lic ilium vidi iunvenem
followed by bis senos cui nostra dies and  hic mihi
responsum primus dedit ille petenti. But both these
cases involve the massing together of words and
phrases either in asyndeton or polysyndeton. Writers
have given special names to all the different forms,
but the names vary with the caprice of the inventor.
The origin of these figures is one and the same,
namely that they make our utterances more vigorous
and emphatic and produce animpression of vehemence
such as might spring from repeated outbursts of
emotion. Gradation, which the Greeks call climax, necessitates a more obvious and less natural application of
art and should therefore be more sparingly employed.
Moreover, it involves addition, since it repeats what
has already been said and, before passing to a new
point, dwells on those which precede. I will translate a very famous instance from the Greek. There are, however, examples of the same thing in Latin authors. Calvus
again writes, etc. It is also to be found in poets,
as in the passage in Homer describing the sceptre
which he traces from the hands of Jupiter down to
those of Agamemnon, and in the following from one
of our own tragedians As regards the figures produced by omission, they
rely for their charm in the main on conciseness and
novelty. There is one of these which I mentioned
in the last book with reference to synecdoche, and
postponed discussing until such time as I came to
deal with figures it occurs when the word omitted
may be clearly gathered from the context an
example may be found in Caelius' denunciation of
Antony stupere gaudio Graecus for we must clearly
supply coepit. Or take the following passage from a
letter of Cicero to Brutus Serno nullus scilicet nisi
de te quid enim potius turn Flavius, cras, inquit,
tabellarii, et ego ibidem has inter cenum exaravi. Of a
similar kind, at any rate in my opinion, are those
passages in which words are decently omitted to
spare our modesty. Some regard this as an aposiopesis, but wrongly.
For in aposiopesis it is either uncertain or at least
requires an explanation of some length to show what
is suppressed, whereas in the present case only one
word, and that of an obvious character, is missing.
If this, then, is an aposiopesis, all omissions will have
a claim to the title. I would not even allow the
name of aposiopesis to all cases where what is omitted
is left to be understood, as for example the following phrase from Cicero's letters, Data Lupercalibus
quo die Antonius Caesari for there, there is no real
suppression the omission is merely playful, for there
is but one way of completing the sentence, namely
with the words diadema imposuit. Another figure
produced by omission is that of which I have just
spoken, when the connecting particles are omitted.
A third is the figure known as in which
a number of clauses are all completed by the same
verb, which would be required by each singly if they
stood alone. In such cases the verb to which the
rest of the sentence refers may come first, as in the
following instance Vicit pudorem lilido, timiorem
audacia, rationem amentia. Or it may come last,
closing a number of clauses, as in the following
Neque enim is es, Catilina, ut te aut pudor unquam a
turpitudine ant meites a periculo aut ratio a furore revocaverit. The verb may even be placed in the middle
so as to serve both what precedes and what follows.
The same figure may join different sexes, as for
example when we speak of a male and female child
under the comprehensive term of ; or it may interchange singular and plural. But these devices
are so common that they can scarcely lay claim to
involve the art essential to figures. On the other
hand it is quite obviously figure, when two different
constructions are combined as in the following case I bid my comrades straight to seize their arms
And war be waged against a savage race. For although the portion of the sentence following
bellum ends with a participle, both clauses of the
sentence are correctly governed by edico. Another
form of connexion, which does not necessarily involve
omission, is called because it connects
two different things, for example To this figure is opposed distinction, which they call by which we distinguish between
similar things, as in this sentence But this is entirely
dependent on definition, and therefore I have my
doubts whether it can be called a figure. Its opposite
occurs when we pass at a bound from one thing to
something different, as though from like to like; for
example with what follows. There is a third class of figures which attracts the
ear of the audience and excites their attention by
some resemblance, equality or contrast of words.
To this class belongs paronomasia, which we call
adnominatio. This may be effected in different ways.
It may depend on the resemblance of one word to
another which has preceded, although the words are
in different cases. Take the following passage from
Domitius Afer's defence of Cloatilla Mulier omnium
rerum imiperita, in omnnibus rebus infelix. Or the same
word may be repeated with greater meaning, as
quando homo, hostis homno. But although I have used
these examples to illustrate something quite different,
one of them involves both emphasis and reiteration.
The opposite of parononasia occurs when one word is
proved to be false by repetition; for instance, Akin to this is that syled where the
same word is used in two different meanings. When
Proculeius reproached his son with waiting for his
death, and the son replied that he was not waiting
for it, the former retorted, Well then, I ask you to
wait for it. Sometimes such difference in meaning
is obtained not by using the same word, but one like
it, as for example by saying that a man whom you
think dignus supplicatione worthy of supplication is
supplicio adficiendus. There are also other ways in
which the same words may be used in different
senses or altered by the lengthening or shortening of a syllable this is a poor trick even when employed
in jest, and I am surprised that it should be included
in the text-books the instances which I quote are
therefore given as examples for avoidance, not for
imitation. Here they are Amari iucundum est, si
curetur ne quid insit amari, and Avium dulcedo ad avium
ducit; and again this jest from Ovid, Cornificius calls this traductio, that is the transference of the meaning of one word to another. It
has, however, greater elegance when it is employed
to distinguish the exact meanings of things, as in the
following example the same is true when the meaning of verbs is reversed
by a change in the preposition with which they are
compounded for example, Non emissus ex urbe, sed
immissus in urbem esse videatur. The effect is better
still and more emphatic when our pleasure is derived
both from the figurative form and the excellence of
the sense, as in the following instance emit morte
immortalitatem. A more trivial effect is produced by
the following Non Pisonum, sed pistorum, and Ex
oratore arator, while phrases such as Ne patres conscripti videantur circumscripti, or raro evenit, sed vehenenter venit, are the worst of all. It does, however,
sometimes happen that a bold and vigorous conception may derive a certain charm from the contrast
between two words not dissimilar in sound. I do not know that there is any reason why modesty
should prevent me from illustrating this point from
my own family. My father, in the course of a declamation against a man who had said he would die
on his embassy and then returned after a few days'
absence without accomplishing anything, said, non
exigo ut immoriaris legationi immorare. For the
sense is forcible and the sound of the two words,
which are so very different in meaning, is pleasant,
more especially since the assonance is not far fetched,
but presents itself quite naturally, one word being of
the speaker's own selection, while the other is supplied by his opponent. The old orators were at
great pains to achieve elegance in the use of words
similar or opposite in sound. Gorgias carried the
practice to an extravagant pitch, while Isocrates, at
any rate in his early days, was much addicted to it.
Even Cicero delighted in it, but showed some restraint in the employment of a device which is not
unattractive save when carried to excess, and, further,
by the weight of his thought lent dignity to what
would otherwise have been mere trivialities. For
in itself this artifice is a flat and foolish affectation,
but when it goes hand in hand with vigour of
thought, it gives the impression of natural charm,
which the speaker has not had to go far to find.
There are some four different forms of play upon
verbal resemblances. The first occurs when we
select some word which is not very unlike another,
as in the line of Virgil or, sic in hac calamitosa fama quasi in aliqua perniciosissim flamma, and non enim tarn spes laudanda quam res est. Or at any rate the words selected will be
of equal length and will have similar terminations,
as in non verbis, sed armis. A good effect may also
be produced by an artifice such as the following, so
long as the thought which it expresses be vigorous quantum possis, in eo semper experire ut prosis.
The name commonly applied to this is though the Stoic Theon thinks that in cases of the correspondence between the clauses must
be exact. The second form occurs when clauses
conclude alike, the same syllables being placed at
the end of each; this correspondence in the ending
of two or more sentences is called homoeoteleuton.
Here is an example Non modo ad salutem eius exstinguendam sed etiam gloriam per tales viros infringendam.
This figure is usually, though not invariably, found in
the groups of three clauses, styled of which
the following may be cited as an illustration vicit
pudorem libido, timorem audacia, rationed amentia.
But the device may be applied to four clauses or
more. The effect may even be produced by single
words; for example, Hecuba hoc dolet, pudet, piget,
or abiit, excessit, erupit, evasit. In the third form the
correspondence is produced by the use of similar
cases; it is known as But this name,
though it implies a certain similarity, does not necessarily involve identity in termination, since it means
no more than similarity of case, irrespective of the
fact that words may be differently declined, and does
not always occur at the end of a sentence; the correspondence may occur at the beginning, middle or end of clauses, or may be varied so that the middle
of one clause corresponds with the beginning of
another and the end with the middle in fact, any
arrangement of correspondences is permissible. Nor
need the words which correspond consist of the
same number of syllables. For example, we find
the following sentence in Domitius Afer Amisso
nuper infelicis aulae, si non praesidio inter pericula,
tamen solacio inter adversa. The best form of this
figure is that in which the beginnings and ends of
the clauses correspond as in this case praesidio corresponds with solacio and pericula with adversa, in such
a way that there is a close resemblance between the
words, while cadence and termination are virtually
identical. It is also desirable that the clauses should
be of equal length, although as a matter of fact this
forms the fourth figure of this class, and is known as The following will serve as an example,
being both and Si, quantum in
agro locisque desertis audacia potest, tantum in foro atque
iudiciis impudentia valeret; continuing, it combines and non minus
nunc in causa cederet Aulus Caecina Sexti Aebutii imnpudentiae, quam turn in vi facienda cessit audaciae. This
passage derives an additional elegance from the figure
which I mentioned above as consisting in the repetition of words with an alteration of case, tense, mood,
etc., to be found in this instance in the words non
minus cederet quam cessit. The following, on the other hand, combines homoeoteleuton and paronomasia
Neminem alteri posse dare in matrinonium, nisi penes
quem sit patrimonium. Antithesis, which Roman writers call either contrapositum or contentio, may be effected in more than one
way. Single words may be contrasted with single, as
in the passage recently quoted, Vicit pudorem libido,
timorem audacia, or the contrast may be between
pairs of words, as in non nostri ingenii, vestri auxilii est,
or sentence may be contrasted with sentence, as in
dominetur in contionibus, iaceat in iudiciis. Next to
this another form may appropriately be placed,
namely that which we have styled distinction and of
which the following is an example Odit populus
Romanus privaiam luxuriam, publicam magoificentiam
diligit. The same is true of the figure by which
words of similar termination, but of different
meaning are placed at the end of corresponding
clauses, as in ut quod in tempore mali fuit, nihil obsit,
quod in causa boni fruit, prosit. Nor is the contrasted
phrase always placed immediately after that to
which it is opposed, as it is in the following
instance est igitur haec, indices, non scripta,
sed nala lex but, as Cicero says, we may have
correspondence between subsequent particulars and
others previously mentioned, as in the passage which
immediately follows that just quoted quam non
didicimus, accepimus, leginmus, verum ex natura ipsa
arrptluimus, hauusimus, epressimus. Again the contrast is not always expressed antithetically, as is
shown by the following passage from Rutilius
nobis primis dii immortales fruges dedelunt, nos, quod
soli accepimus, in omnes terras distribuimus. Antithesis may also be effected by employing that figure,
known as by which words are repeated
in different cases, tenses, moods, etc., as for instance
when we say, non ut edam, vivo, sed ut vivam, edo I do
not live to eat, but eat to live. There is an instance of this in Cicero, where he has managed,
while changing the case, to secure similarity of termination ut et sine inridia culpa plectatur et sine culpa
invidia ponatur. Again the clauses may end with
the same word, as when Cicero says of Sextus
Roscius etenim cum artifex eiusmodi est ut solus videatur dignus qui in scena spectetur, turn vir eiusmodi est ut
solus dignus esse videatur qui eo non accedat. There
is also a special elegance which may be secured by
placing names in antithesis, as in the following instance, Si consul Antonius, Brutus hostis; si conservator
rei publicae Brutus, hostis Antonius. I have already said more than was necessary on the
subject of figures. But there will still be some who
think that the following which they call is a figure Incredibile est, quod dico, sed verum they
say the same of Aliquis hoc semel tubit, neno bis, ego
ter which they style , and of Longius evects
sum, sed redeo ad propositumr, which they call There are some figures of speech which differ
little from figures of thought, as for example that of
hesitation. For when we hesitate over a thing, it
belongs to the former class, whereas when we hesitate over a word, it must be assigned to the latter,
as for instance if we say, The same consideration applies to correction. For correction emends,
where hesitation expresses a doubt. Some have
even held that it applies to personification as well;
they think, for example, that Avarice is the mother of
cruelly, Sallust's O Romulus of Arpinum in his speech
against Cicero, and the Thriasian Oedipus of Menander are figures of speech. All these points have
been discussed in full detail by those who have not
given this subject merely incidental treatment as a
portion of a larger theme, but have devoted whole
books to the discussion of the topic I allude to
writers such as Caecilius, Dionysius, Rutilius, Cornificius, Visellius and not a few others, although there
are living authors who will be no less famous than
they. Now though I am ready to admit that more
figures of speech may perhaps be discovered by certain
writers, I cannot agree that such figures are better
than those which have been laid down by high
authorities. Above all I would point out that
Cicero has included a number of figures in the third
book of the de Oratore, which in his later work, the
Orator, he has omitted, thereby seeming to indicate
that he condemned them. Some of these are figures
of thought rather than of speech, such as meiosis, the
introduction of the unexpected, imagery, answering
our own questions, digression, permission, arguments drawn from opposites for I suppose that by contrarium he means what is elsewhere styled
, and proof borrowed from an opponent.
There are some again which are not figures at all,
such as arrangement, distinction by headings, and
circumscription, whether this latter term be intended
to signify the concise expression of thought or
definition, which is actually regarded by Cornificius
and Rutilius as a figure of speech. With regard to
the elegant transposition of words, that is, hyperbaton, which Caecilius also thinks is a figure, I have
included it among tropes. As for mutation of the
kind which Rutilius calls its function is to
point out the differences between men, things and
deeds if it is used on an extended scale, it is not a
figure, if on a narrower scale, it is mere antithesis, while
if it is intended to mean hypallage, enough has already
been said on the subject. Again what sort of a
figure is this addition of a reason, for what is advanced,
which Rutilius calls  It may also be
doubted whether the assignment of a reason for each
distinct statement, with which Rutilius opens his discussion of figures, is really a figure. He calls it and states that strictly it applies to a
number of propositions, since the reason is either
attached to each proposition separately, as in the
following passage from Gaius Antonius ; or, after two or three propositions have
been stated, the reasons for them may be given continuously in the same order, as for example in the words that Brutus uses of Gnaeus Pompeius But a
number of reasons may also be assigned for one statement, as in the lines of Virgil As to what Cicero means by reference, I am in the
dark if he means or or I have already discussed them. But whatever its meaning may be, he does not mention it in
the Orator any more than the other terms I have
just mentioned. The only figure of speech mentioned
in that work, which I should prefer to regard as a
figure of thought owing to its emotional character,
is exclamation. I agree with him about all the rest.
To these Caecilius adds periphrasis, of which I have
already spoken,5 while Cornificius adds interrogation,
reasoning, suggestion, transition, concealment, and
further, sentence, clause, isolated words, interpretation and conclusion. Of these the first down to
and including concealment are figures of thought,
while the remainder are not figures at all. Rutilius
also in addition to the figures found in other
authors adds, of which I say the same.
I will pass by those authors who set no limit to
their craze for inventing technical terms and even
include among figures what really comes under the
head of arguments. With regard to genuine figures, I would briefly
add that, while, suitably placed, they are a real
ornament to style, they become perfectly fatuous
when sought after overmuch. There are some
who pay no consideration to the weight of their
matter or the force of their thoughts and think
themselves supreme artists, if only they succeed in
forcing even the emptiest of words into figurative
form, with the result that they are never tired of
stringing figures together, despite the fact that it
is as ridiculous to hunt for figures without reference
to the matter as it is to discuss dress and gesture
without reference to the body. But even perfectly
correct figures must not be packed too closely together.
Changes of facial expression and glances of the eyes
are most effective in pleading, but if the orator never
ceases to distort his face with affected grimaces or to
wag his head and roll his eyes, he becomes a laughing-stock. So too oratory possesses a natural mien,
which while it is far from demanding a stolid and
immovable rigidity should as far as possible restrict
itself to the expression with which it is endowed by
nature. But it is of the first importance that we
should know what are the requirements of time,
place and character on each occasion of speaking.
For the majority of these figures aim at delighting the
hearer. But when terror, hatred and pity are the weapons called for in the fray, who will endure the
orator who expresses his anger, his sorrow or his
entreaties in neat antitheses, balanced cadences and
exact correspondences Too much care for our words
under such circumstances weakens the impression of
emotional sincerity, and wherever the orator displays
his art unveiled, the hearer says, IV. I should not venture to speak of artistic
structure after what Cicero has said upon the subject for there is I think no topic to which he has
devoted such elaborate discussion but for the fact
that his own contemporaries ventured to traverse his
theories on this subject even in letters which they
addressed to him, while a number of later writers
have left on record numerous observations on the
same topic. Accordingly on a large number of
questions I shall be found in agreement with Cicero
and shall deal more briefly with those points which
admit of no dispute, while there will be certain
subjects on which I shall express a certain amount
of disagreement. For, though I intend to make my
own views clear, I shall leave my readers free to
hold their own opinion. I am well aware that there are certain writers
who would absolutely bar all study of artistic structure and contend that language as it chances to
present itself in the rough is more natural and even
more manly. If by this they mean that only that
is natural which originated with nature and has
never received any subsequent cultivation, there is
an end to the whole art of oratory. For the first
men did not speak with the care demanded by that
art nor in accordance with the rules that it lays down. They knew nothing of introducing their
case by means of an exordium, of instructing the
jury by a statement of facts, of proving by argument
or of arousing the emotions. They lacked all these
qualifications as completely as they lacked all knowledge of the theory of artistic structure. But if
they were to be forbidden all progress in this
respect, they ought equally to have been forbidden
to exchange their huts for houses, their cloaks of
skin for civilised raiment and their mountains and
forests for cities. What art was ever born fullgrown What does not ripen with cultivation
Why do we train the vine Why dig it We clear
the fields of brambles, and they too are natural products of the soil. We tame animals, and yet they
are born wild. No, that which is most natural is
that which nature permits to be done to the greatest
perfection. How can a style which lacks orderly
structure be stronger than one that is welded together
and artistically arranged It must not be regarded
as the fault of the study of structure that the employment of feet consisting of short syllables such as
characterise the Sotadean and Galliambic metres
and certain prose rhythms closely resembling them in
wildness, weakens the force of our matter. Just as
river-currents are more violent when they run along a
sloping bed, that presents no obstacles to check their
course, than when their waters are broken and baffled
by rocks that obstruct the channel, so a style which
flows in a continuous stream with all the full development of its force is better than one which is rough
and broken. Why then should it be thought that
polish is inevitably prejudicial to vigour, when the
truth is that nothing can attain its full strength without the assistance of art, and that art is always
productive of beauty Is it not the fact that grace
always goes with the highest skill in throwing the
spear, and that the truer the archer's aim, the more
comely is his attitude Again in fencing and all
the contests of the wrestling school, what one of all
the tricks of attack and defence is there, that does
not require movements and firmness of foot such as
can only be acquired by art Consequently in my
opinion artistic structure gives force and direction
to our thoughts just as the throwing-thong and the
bowstring do to the spear and the arrow. And
for this reason all the best scholars are convinced
that the study of structure is of the utmost value,
not merely for charming the ear, but for stirring
the soul. For in the first place nothing can penetrate to the emotions that stumbles at the portals of
the ear, and secondly man is naturally attracted by
harmonious sounds. Otherwise it would not be the
case that musical instruments, in spite of the fact
that their sounds are inarticulate, still succeed in
exciting a variety of different emotions in the hearer.
In the sacred games different methods are employed
to excite and calm the soul, different melodies are
required for the war-song and the entreaty sung by
the suppliant on bended knee, while the war-note
of the trumpet that leads the army forth to battle
has no resemblance to the call that sounds the
retreat. It was the undoubted custom of the Pythagoreans, when they woke from slumber, to rouse
their souls with the music of the lyre, that they
might be more alert for action, and before they
retired to rest, to soothe their minds by melodies
from the same instrument, in order that all restlessness of thought might be lulled to orderly repose.
But if there is such secret power in rhythm and
melody alone, this power is found at its strongest in
eloquence, and, however important the selection
of words for the expression of our thoughts, the
structural art which welds them together in the
body of a period or rounds them off at the close,
has at least an equal claim to importance. For
there are some things which, despite triviality of
thought and mediocrity of language, may achieve
distinction in virtue of this excellence alone. In
fact, if we break up and disarrange any sentence
that may have struck us as vigorous, charming or
elegant, we shall find that all its force, attraction
and grace have disappeared. Cicero in his Orator
breaks up some of his own utterances in this way and so on. Disarrange
these periods in such a manner, and you will find
that the shafts you have hurled are broken or wide
of the mark. Cicero also corrects passages in the
speeches of Gracchus where the structure appears to
him to be harsh. For Cicero this is becoming enough,
but we may content ourselves with testing our own
power of welding together in artistic form the disconnected words and phrases which present themselves
to us. For why should we seek elsewhere for
examples of faults which we may all of us find in
our own work One point, however, it is enough
simply to noticethat the more beautiful in thought
and language the sentence which you deprive of
such structural cohesion, the more hideous will be the effect upon the style, for the very brilliance
of the words at once exposes the carelessness of
their arrangement. Accordingly, although I admit
that artistic structure, at any rate in perfection,
was the last accomplishment to be attained by
oratory, I still hold that even primitive orators
regarded it as one of the objects of their study, as
far at least as the rudeness of their attainments
permitted. For even Cicero for all his greatness
will never persuade me that Lysias, Herodotus and
Thucydides were careless in this respect. They
may not perhaps have pursued the same ideals as
Demosthenes and Plato, and even these latter
differed in their methods. For it would never have
done to spoil the fine and delicate texture of Lysias
by the introduction of richer rhythms, since he
would thus have lost all that surpassing grace which
he derives from his simple and unaffected tone,
while he would also have sacrificed the impression
of sincerity which he now creates. For it must be
remembered that he wrote his speeches for others
to deliver, so that it was right that they should
suggest a lack of form and artistic structure indeed
his success in producing this effect actually shows his
mastery of structure. Again history, which should
move with speed and impetuosity, would have been
ill-suited by the halts imposed by the rounding off
of the period, by the pauses for breath inevitable
in oratory, and the elaborate methods of opening
sentences and bringing them to a close. It is however true that in the speeches inserted by historians
we may note something in the way of balanced
cadences and antitheses. As regards Herodotus,
while his flow, in my opinion, is always gentle, his dialect has such a sweetness of its own that it even
seems to contain a certain rhythmical power hidden
within itself. However I shall speak of the different
ideals a little later my immediate task is to teach
the student elementary rules which are essential if
correctness of structure is to be attained. There are then in the first place two kinds of
style the one is closely welded and woven together,
while the other is of a looser texture such as is
found in dialogues and letters, except when they
deal with some subject above their natural level,
such as philosophy, politics or the like. In saying
this, I do not mean to deny that even this looser
texture has its own peculiar rhythms which are perhaps the most difficult of all to analyse. For
dialogues and letters do not demand continual
hiatus between vowels or absence of rhythm, but on
the other hand they have not the flow or the compactness of other styles, nor does one word lead up
so inexorably to another, the structural cohesion
being loose rather than non-existent. Again in
legal cases of minor importance a similar simplicity
will be found to be most becoming, a simplicity,
that is to say, that does not dispense with rhythm
altogether, but uses rhythms of a different kind,
conceals them and employs a certain secrecy in their
construction.
But the more closely welded style is composed of
three elements the comma, or as we call it incisum,
the colon, or in Latin menbrum, and the period,
which Roman writers call ambitus, circumductum, continuatio or conclusio. Further, in all artistic structure
there are three necessary qualities, order, connexion
and rhythm. Of these we will first discuss order, which must be
considered in connexion with words taken both
singly and in conjunction. Words taken singly are
known as asyndeta unconnected. In dealing with
them we must take care that our style does not
diminish in force through the fact that a weaker
word is made to follow a stronger as, for example,
if after calling a man a despoiler of temples we were
to speak of him as a thief, or after styling him a
highwayman were to dub him an insolent fellow.
For sentences should rise and grow in force of this
an excellent example is provided by Cicero, where
he says, ; for there each phrase is
followed by one stronger than the last, whereas, if
he had begun by referring to his whole body, he
could scarcely have gone on to speak of his lungs
and throat without an anticlimax. There is also
another species of order which may be entitled
natural, as for example when we speak of in
preference to the reverse order. In some cases a
change in the order will make a word superfluous
for example, we write fratres gemini rather than
gemini fratres twin-brothers, since if gemini came
first, there would be no necessity to add fratres. The
rule which some have sought to enforce that nouns
should precede verbs, and verbs adverbs, while
epithets and pronouns should follow their substantives, is a mere extravagance, since the reverse
order is often adopted with excellent effect. Another
piece of extravagant pedantry is to insist that the
first place should always be occupied by what is first in order of time such an order is no doubt often the
best, but merely because previous events are often the
most important and should consequently be placed
before matters of more trivial import. If the demands
of artistic structure permit, it is far best to end the
sentence with a verb for it is in verbs that the
real strength of language resides. But if it results
in harshness of sound, this principle must give way
before the demands of rhythm, as is frequently the
case in the best authors of Rome and Greece. Of
course, in every case where a verb does not end the
sentence, we shall have an hyperbaton, but hyperbaton
is an admitted trope or figure, and therefore is to be
regarded as an adornment. For words are not cut
to suit metrical feet, and are therefore transferred
from place to place to form the most suitable combinations, just as in the case of unhewn stones their
very irregularity is the means of suggesting what
other stones they will best fit and what will supply
them with the surest resting-place. On the other
hand, the happiest effects of language are produced
when it is found possible to employ the natural
order, apt connexion and appropriate rhythm. Some
transpositions are too long, as I have pointed out in
previous books, while at times they involve faulty
structure, although some writers actually aim at this
vicious type of transposition, in order to create an
appearance of freedom and license, as in the following phrases from Maecenas, sole et aurora rubent
plurima; inter se sacra movit aqua fraxinos; ne exequias
quidem unus inter miserrimos viderem meas. The worst
feature in these examples, is that he plays pranks with his structure while dealing with a sad theme.
It is, however, not infrequently possible to give
special significance to a word by placing it at the
close of the sentence and thereby stamping and
impressing it on the mind of the hearer, whereas if
it were placed in the middle of the sentence, it
would remain unnoticed, escape the attention and be
obscured by its surroundings; the following passage
from Cicero will illustrate what I mean ut tibi
necesse esset in conspectu populi Romani vomere postridie. Transfer the last word to some other position
and the effect will be decreased. For the whole
passage is made to converge to a point at the end;
the disgraceful circumstance of his being forced to
vomit has been mentioned and the audience expect
nothing more, when the orator adds yet a further
revolting feature of the case, namely that he was
still unable to retain his food the day after the
carouse. Domitius Afer was in the habit of transferring words at the cadence of the sentence solely
for the purpose of harshening his rhythm, more
especially in his exordia, as, for example, in his
defence of Cloatilla, where he says gratias again
continuo, and in his defence of Laelia, where he
says, eis utrisque apud te iudicem periclitatur Laelia.
To such an extent did he avoid the voluptuous
effect of soft and delicate rhythm, that he actually
interposed obstacles to break the natural harmonies
of his language. There is a further drawback resulting from the faulty arrangement of words, with
which we are all familiar, namely, that it leads to
ambiguity. The above remarks will, I think, suffice
as a brief summary of the points which require
notice in connexion with order. If the order is faulty, our language will be deservedly liable to the
charge of lacking artistic construction, however
compact and rhythmical it may be. The next point for consideration is connexion,
that is to say connexion between words, commata,
cola and periods. For all these have merits and
defects which turn on the way in which they are
linked together. I will follow the natural order
and will begin by pointing out that there are some
blemishes so obvious that even the uneducated
regard them as worthy of censure; I refer to occasions when two consecutive words form some
unseemly expression by the coalescence of the
last syllable of the first word and the first of the
second. Again, there are occasions when vowels
clash. When this happens, the language is broken
by gaps and interstices and seems to labour. The
most unpleasing effects of sound will be produced
by the juxtaposition of the same long vowels, while
the worst hiatus occurs between vowels which are
pronounced hollow- or open-mouthed. E has a
flatter, i a narrower sound, and consequently such
blemishes are less noticeable where they are concerned. It is a less serious fault to place short
vowels after long, a statement which applies even
more strongly to placing short vowels before long.
But the least unsatisfactory combination is that of
two short vowels. And in all conjunctions of vowels,
the resulting sound will be proportionately soft or
harsh according as they resemble or differ from each
other in the method of utterance. On the other
hand, hiatus is not to be regarded as so very terrible
a crime in fact I do not know which is the worse
fault in this connexion, carelessness or a pedantic solicitude for correctness. For anxiety on this score
is bound to check the flow of our language and to
divert us from more important considerations.
Therefore while it is a sign of carelessness to admit
hiatus here, there and everywhere, it is a symptom
of grovelling timidity to be continually in terror of
it, and there is good reason for the view that all the
followers of Isocrates and more especially Theopompus
pay accessive attention to the avoidance of this
detect. On the other hand Demosthenes and Cicero
show a sense of proportion in the way in which they
face the problem. For the coalescence of two letters,
known as may make our language run
more smoothly than if every word closed with its
own vowel, while sometimes hiatus may even prove
becoming and create an impression of grandeur, as
in the following case, pulchra oratione ista iacta te.
For syllables which are naturally long and rich in
sound gain something from the time which intervenes between two vowels, as though there were a
perceptible pause. I cannot do better than quote
the words of Cicero on this subject. Hiatus, he
says, and the meeting of vowels produce a certain
softness of effect, such as to suggest a not unpleasing
carelessness on the part of the orator, as though he were
more anxious about his matter than his words. But consonants also are liable to conflict at the
juncture of words, more especially those letters
which are comparatively harsh in sound; as for
instance when the final s of one word clashes with
x at the opening of the next. Still more unpleasing
is the hissing sound produced by the collision between
a pair of these consonants, as in the phrase ars
studiorum. This was the reason why Servius, as he himself has observed, dropped the final s, whenever
the next word began with a consonant, a practice
for which Luranius takes him to task, while Messala
defends him. For he thinks that Lucilius did not
pronounce the final s in phrases such as, Aeserninus
fuit and dignus locoque, while Cicero in his Orator
records that this was the practice with many of the
ancients. Hence we get forms such as belligerare and
pomeridiem, to which the diee hanc of Cato the Censor,
where the final m is softened into an e, presents an
analogy. Unlearned readers are apt to alter such
forms when they come across them in old books, and
in their desire to decry the ignorance of the scribes
convict themselves of the same fault. On the other
hand, whenever this same letter m comes at the end
of a word and is brought into contact with the opening vowel of the next word in such a manner as to
render coalescence possible, it is, although written,
so faintly pronounced e.g. in phrases such as nultum
ille and quantum erat that it may almost be regarded
as producing the sound of a new letter. For it is not
elided, but merely obscured, and may be considered
as a symbol occurring between two vowels simply
to prevent their coalescence. Care must also be
taken that the last syllables of one word are not
identical with the opening syllables of the next. In
case any of my readers should wonder that I think
it worth while to lay down such a rule, I may point
out that Cicero makes such a slip in his Letters, in the sentence res mihi invisae visae sunt, Brute, and
in the following line of verse, Again it is a blemish to have too many monosyllables in succession, since the inevitable result is
that, owing to the frequency of the pauses, the
rhythm degenerates into a series of jerks. For the
same reason we must avoid placing a number of
short verbs and nouns in succession; the converse
also is true as regards long syllables, since their
accumulation makes our rhythm drag. It is a fault
of the same class to end a number of successive
sentences with similar cadences, terminations and
inflexions. It is likewise inartistic to accumulate
long series of verbs, nouns or other parts of speech,
since even merits produce tedium unless they have
the saving grace of variety. The principles by which the connexion of words
is guided are not sufficient in the case of commata and
cola, though even here beginnings and ends should
harmonise; but our structural effect will very largely
depend on the relative order of these two types of
clause. For in the following instance vomens frustis
esculentis gremium suum el totum tribunal implevit the
order is satisfactory, since the fact of his having filled
the whole judgement seat with his vomiting is the
more important of the two. On the other hand
for I shall repeat the same illustrations for different
purposes to make them more familiar in the following
passage, saxa alque solitudines voci respondent, bestiae saepe immanes cantu flectuntur atque consistunt, the
gradation would be improved, if it were reversed
for it is a greater miracle to move rocks than wild
beasts but the claims of structural grace have
carried the day. However, let us pass to the
consideration of rhythm. All combination, arrangement and connexion of
words involves either rhythms which we call numeri,
or metres, that is, a certain measure. Now though
both rhythm and metre consist of feet, they differ in
more than one respect. For in the first place rhythm
consists of certain lengths of time, while metre is
determined by the order in which these lengths are
arranged. Consequently the one seems to be concerned with quantity and the other with quality.
Rhythm may depend on equal balance, as in the case
of dactylic rhythm, where one long syllable balances
two short, there are it is true other feet of which
this statement is equally true, but the title of
dactylic has been currently applied to all, while even
boys are well aware that a long syllable is equivalent
to two beats and a short to one or it may consist of
feet in which one portion is half as long again as the
other, as is the case with paeanic rhythm a paean
being composed of one long followed by three shorts,
three shorts followed by one long or with any other
arrangement preserving the proportion of three beats
to two or finally one part of the foot may be twice
the length of the other, as in the case of the iambus,
which is composed of a short followed by a long, or
of the choreus consisting of a long followed by a
short. These feet are also employed by metre, but
with this difference, that in rhythm it does not matter
whether the two shorts of the dactyl precede or follow the long; for rhythm merely takes into
account the measurement of the time, that is to say,
it insists on the time taken from its rise to its fall
being the same. The measure of verse on the other
hand is quite different; the anapaest u u _ or spondee
_ _ cannot be substituted at will for the dactyl, nor
is it a matter of indifference whether the paean
begins or ends with short syllables. Further, the
laws of metre not merely refuse the substitution of
one foot for another, but will not even admit the
arbitrary substitution of any dactyl or spondee for any
other dactyl or spondee. For example, in the line the alteration of the order of the dactyls would
destroy the verse. There are also the following
differences, that rhythm has unlimited space over
which it may range, whereas the spaces of metre are
confined, and that, whereas metre has certain definite
cadences, rhythm may run on as it commenced until
it reaches the point of or transition to
another type of rhythm further, metre is concerned
with words alone, while rhythm extends also to the
motion of the body. Again rhythm more readily
admits of rests although they are found in metre as
well. Greater license is, however, admitted when
the time is measured by the beat of the feet or
fingers, and the intervals are distinguished by
certain symbols indicating the number of shorts
contained within a given space hence we speak of
four or five time  or  and others
longer still, the Greek indicating a single beat. In prose the rhythm should be more definite and obvious to all. Consequently, it depends on feet,
by which I mean metrical feet, which occur in
oratory to such an extent that we often let slip
verses of every kind without being conscious of the
fact, while everything written in prose can be shown
by analysis to consist of short lines of verse of certain
kinds or sections of the same. For example, I have
come across tiresome grammarians who attempted to
force prose into definite metres, as though it were a
species of lyric poetry. Cicero, indeed, frequently
asserts that the whole art of prose-structure consists
in rhythm and is consequently censured by some
critics on the ground that he would fetter our
style by the laws of rhythm. For these numeri,
as he himself expressly asserts, are identical with
rhythm, and he is followed in this by Virgil, who
writes, and Horace, who says, Among others they attack Cicero's statement that
the thunderbolts of Demosthenes would not have such
force but for the rhythm with which they are whirled and
sped upon their way. If by rhythmis contorta he really
means what his critics assert, I do not agree with
him. For rhythms have, as I have said, no fixed
limit or variety of structure, but run on with the same rise and fall till they reach their end, and the
style of oratory will not stoop to be measured by
the beat of the foot or the fingers. This fact is
clearly understood by Cicero, who frequently shows
that the sense in which he desires that prose should
be rhythmical is rather that it should not lack rhythm,
a deficiency which would stamp the author as a man
of no taste or refinement, than that it should be tied
by definite rhythmical laws, like poetry; just as,
although we may not wish certain persons to be professional gymnasts, we still do not wish them to be
absolutely ignorant of the art of gynmastics. But the
rounding of the period to an appropriate close which
is produced by the combination of feet requires some
name; and what name is there more suitable than
rhythm, that is to say, the rhythm of oratory, just as
the enthymeme is the syllogism of oratory For my
own part, to avoid incurring the calumny, from which
even Cicero was not free, I ask my reader, whenever I
speak of the rhythm of artistic structure as I have
done on every occasion, to understand that I refer
to the rhythm of oratory, not of verse. It is the task of collocation to link together the
words which have been selected, approved and handed
over to its custody. For even harsh connexions are
better than those which are absolutely valueless.
None the less I should allow the orator to select
certain words for their euphony, provided always that
their force and meaning are the same as those of
the alternative words. He may also be permitted
to add words, provided they are not superfluous, and
to omit them, provided they are not essential to the
sense, while he may employ figures to alter case and
number, since such variety is attractive in itself, quite apart from the fact that it is frequently adopted
for the sake of the rhythm. Again if reason
demand one form and usage another, the claims of
rhythm will decide our choice between the two,
e.g. between vitavisse and vitasse or between deprehendere and deprendere. Further I do not object to
the coalescence of syllables or anything that does no
injury either to sense or style. The most important
task, however, is to know what word is best fitted to
any given place. And the most accomplished artist
will be the man who does not arrange his words
solely with a view to rhythmic effect. On the other hand the management of feet is far
more difficult in prose than in verse, first because
there are but few feet in a single line of verse which
is far shorter than the lengthy periods of prose;
secondly because each line of verse is always uniform
and its movement is determined by a single definite
scheme, whereas the structure of prose must be
varied if it is to avoid giving offence by its monotony
and standing convicted of affectation. Rhythm
pervades the whole body of prose through all its
extent. For we cannot speak without employing the
long and short syllables of which feet are composed.
Its presence is, however, most necessary and most
apparent at the conclusion of the period, firstly
because every group of connected thoughts has its
natural limit and demands a reasonable interval to
divide it from the commencement of what is to
follow secondly because the ear, after following the
unbroken flow of the voice and being carried along
down the stream of oratory, finds its best opportunity
of forming a sound judgement on what it has heard,
when the rush of words comes to a halt and gives it time for consideration. Consequently all harshness
and abruptness must be avoided at this point, where
the mind takes breath and recovers its energy. It
is there that style has its citadel, it is this point that
excites the eager expectation of the audience, it is
from this that the declaimer wins all his glory.
Next to the conclusion of the period, it is the
beginning which claims the most care for the
audience have their attention fixed on this as well.
But the opening of the sentence presents less difficulty, since it is independent and is not the slave of
what has preceded. It merely takes what has preceded as a starting point, whereas the conclusion
coheres with what has preceded, and however carefully constructed, its elegance will be wasted, if the
path which leads up to it be interrupted. Hence it
is that although the rhythmical structure adopted by
Demosthenes in the passage and again in another passage approved by
all, I think, except Brutus is regarded as severely correct, Cicero is
criticised for passages such as familiaris coeperat esse
balneatori and for the not less unpleasing archipiratae.
For although balneatori and archipiratae give exactly
the same cadence as and the former are more severely correct. There is also
something in the fact that in the passages from
Cicero two feet are contained in one word, a
practice which even in verse produces an unduly
effeminate effect, and that not merely when the line
ends with a five-syllable word as in fortissima
Tyndaridarum but also in four-syllable endings such as Appnnino, armamentis and Oreione. Consequently
we must also avoid ending our periods with words
containing too many syllables.
With regard to the middle portions of our periods
we must take care not merely that they possess
internal cohesion, but also that the rhythm is neither
sluggish nor long, and above all that we do not fall
into the now fashionable fault of placing a number
of short syllables together with the result that we
produce an effect not unlike the sound of a child's
rattle. For while the beginnings and conclusions of
periods, where the sense begins or ends, are the most
important, it is none the less the fact that the middle
portion may involve some special efforts which
necessitate slight pauses. Remember that the feet
of a runner, even though they do not linger where
they fall, still leave a footprint. Consequently not
only must commata and cola begin and end becomingly, but even in parts which are absolutely
continuous without a breathing space, there must be
such almost imperceptible pauses. Who, for example,
can doubt that there is but one thought in the following passage and that it should be pronounced without
a halt for breath Animadverti, idlices, omnem accusatoris oralionem in duas divisan esse parties Still the
groups formed by the first two words, the next three,
and then again by the next two and three, have each
their own special rhythms and cause a slight check
in our breathing at least such is the opinion of
specialists in rhythm. And just in proportion as
these small segments of the period are grave or
vigorous, slow or rapid, languid or the reverse, so
will the periods which they go to form be severe or
luxuriant, compact or loose. Again, the conclusions of clauses sometimes seem to halt or hang, if they
are regarded apart from their context, but are usually
caught up and supported by what follows, so that
what seemed a faulty cadence is corrected by the
continuation. Non vult populus Romanus obsoletis
criminibus accusari Verrem would be harsh in rhythm,
if the sentence ended there; but when it is continued
with what follows, nova postulat, inaudita desiderat,
although the words are separate in meaning, the
rhythmical effect is preserved. Ut adeas, tantum
dabis would be a bad conclusion, for it forms the last
portion of an iambic trimeter but it is followed by
ut cibum vestitumque introferre liceat, tantum the
rhythm is still abrupt but is strengthened and supported by the last phrase of all, nemo recusabat. The appearance of a complete verse in prose has
a most uncouth effect, but even a portion of a verse
is ugly, especially if the last half of a verse occurs in
the cadence of a period or the first half at the beginning. The reverse order may on the other hand
often be positively pleasing, since at times the first
half of a verse will make an excellent conclusion,
provided that it does not cover more than a few
syllables. This is especially the case with the
senarnis or octonarius. In Aliica fuisse is the opening of a senarius and closes the first clause of the pro
Ligario esse videatur, with which we are now only
too familiar as a conclusion, is the beginning of an
ocionarius. Similar effects are to be found in Demosthenes, as for example and and throughout almost the whole exordium of that
speech. The ends of verses are also excellently
suited to the beginning of a period etsi vereor, iudices, for example and animadverti, iudices. But
the opening feet of a verse are not suited to the
opening phrases of prose Livy provides an example
of this in his preface, which begins with the first
half of a hexameter, 'Facturusne operae premium sim'
for these are the words as he wrote them, and they
are better so than as they have been corrected.
Again, the cadence of a verse is not suitable to the
cadence of a period compare the phrase of Cicero,
Quo me vertam, nescio, which is the end of a trimeter.
It matters not whether we speak of a trimeter or of
a senarius, since the line has six feet and three beats.
The end of a hexameter forms a yet worse conclusion;
compare the following passage from the letters of
Brutus neque illi malunt halbere tutores aut defensores,
quoniam causam sciunt placuiisse Catoni. Iambic endings
are less noticeable, because that metre is near akin
to prose. Consequently such lines often slip from
us unawares they are specially common in Brutus
as a result of his passion for severity of style; they
are not infrequent in Asinius, and are sometimes
even found in Cicero, as for example at the very
beginning of his speech against Lucius Piso Pro di
immortales, qui hic nunc illuxit dies Equal care must
however be taken to avoid any phrase of a definitely
metrical character, such as the following passage
from Sallust Falso queritur de natura sua.For
although the language of prose is bound by certain
laws, it should appear to be free. None the less
Plato, despite the care which he devotes to his
rhythm, has not succeeded in avoiding this fault at the very opening of the Timaeus, where we are met
at the very outset with the opening of a hexameter,
which is followed by a colon which can be scanned as
an Anacreontic, or if you like, as a trimeter, while it
is also possible to form what the Greeks call a that is a portion of the hexameter
composed of two feet and a part of a third and all
these instances occur within the space of three lines.
Again Thucydides has allowed to slip from his pen
a phrase of the most effeminate rhythm in But, having stated that all prose rhythm consists
of feet, I must say something on these as well.
Different names are given to these feet, and it is
necessary to determine what we shall call each of
them. For my part I propose to follow Cicero
for he himself followed the most eminent Greek
authorities, with this exception, that in my opinion
a foot is never more than three syllables long,
whereas Cicero includes the paean and the dochmiac
u   u , of which the former has four and the
latter as many as five syllables. He does not, however, conceal the fact that some regard these as
rhythms rather than feet and they are right in so
doing, since whatever is longer than three syllables
involves more than one foot. Since then there are
four feet which consist of two syllables, and eight
composed of three, I shall call them by the following
names two long syllables make a spondee; the
pyrrhic or pariambus, as some call it, is composed
of two shorts; the iambus of a short followed by
a long; its opposite, that is a long followed by a
short, is a choreus, for I prefer that term to the
name of trochee which is given it by others. Of trisyllabic feet the dactyl consists of a long followed
by two shorts, while its opposite, which has the
same time-length, is called an anapaest. A short
between two longs makes an amphimacer, although
it is more often called a cretic, while a long between
two shorts produces its opposite, the amphibruachys.
Two long syllables following a short make a bacchius,
whereas, if the long syllables come first the foot is
called a palimbacchius. Three shorts make a trochee,
although those who give that name to the choreus
call it a tribrach three longs make a molossus. Every
one of these feet is employed in prose, but those
which take a greater time to utter and derive a
certain stability from the length of their syllables
produce a weightier style, short syllables being best
adapted for a nimble and rapid style. Both types
are useful in their proper place for weight and
slowness are rightly condemned in passages where
speed is required, as are jerkiness and excessive
speed in passages which call for weight. It may
also be important to remark that there are degrees
of length in long syllables and of shortness in short.
Consequently, although syllables may be thought
never to involve more than two time-beats or less
than one, and although for that reason in metre all
shorts and all longs are regarded as equal to other
shorts and longs, they none the less possess some
undefinable and secret quality, which makes some
seem longer and others shorter than the normal.
Verse, on the other hand, has its own peculiar
features, and consequently some syllables may be
either long or short. Indeed, since strict law
allows a vowel to be long or short, as the case may
be, when it stands alone, no less than when one or more consonants precede it, there can be no doubt,
when it comes to the measuring of feet, that a short
syllable, followed by another which is either long
or short, but is preceded by two consonants, is
lengthened, as for example in the phrase agrestem
tenui musam. For both a and gres are short, but
the latter lengthens the former, thereby transferring
to it something of its own time-length. But how
can it do this, unless it possesses greater length
than is the portion of the shortest syllables, to
which it would itself belong if the consonants st
were removed As it is, it lends one time-length
to the preceding syllable, and subtracts one from
that which follows. Thus two syllables which are
naturally short have their time-value doubled by
position. I am, however, surprised that scholars of the
highest learning should have held the view that some
feet should be specially selected and others condemned for the purposes of prose, as if there were
any foot which must not inevitably be found in
prose. Ephorus may express a preference for the
paean which was discovered by Thrasymachus and
approved by Aristotle and for the dactyl also, on
the ground that both these feet provide a happy
mixture of long and short; and may avoid the
spondee and the trochee, condemning the one as too
slow and the other as too rapid; Aristotle may
regard the heroic foot, which is another name for
the dactyl, as too dignified and the iambus as too
commonplace, and may damn the trochee as too hasty and dub it the cancan; Theodectes and Theophrastus may agree with him, and a later critic,
Dionysius of Halicarnassus, may adopt a similar
view; but for all they say, these feet will force
themselves upon them against their will, and it will
not always be possible for them to employ the dactyl
or their beloved paean, which they select for special
praise because it so rarely forms part of a verse rhythm. It is not, however, the words which cause
some feet to be of more common occurrence than
others; for the words cannot be increased or
diminished in bulk, nor yet can they, like the notes
in music, be made short or long at will; everything
depends on transposition and arrangement. For a
large proportion of feet are formed by the connexion
or separation of words, which is the reason why
several different verses can be made out of the same
words for example, I remember that a poet of no
small distinction writing the following line a line which, if the order of the words be reversed,
becomes a Sotadean; again, the following Sotadean,
if reversed, reads as as an iambic trimeter Feet therefore should be mixed, while care must be
taken that the majority are of a pleasing character,
and that the inferior feet are lost in the surrounding
crowd of their superior kindred. The nature of
letters and syllables cannot be changed, but their
adaptability to each other is a consideration of no
small importance. Long syllables, as I have said, carry the greater dignity and weight, while short
syllables create an impression of speed if the latter
are intermixed with a few long syllables, their gait
will be a run, but a gallop if they are continuous.
When a short syllable is followed by a long the effect
is one of vigorous ascent, while a long followed by a
short produces a gentler impression and suggests
descent. It is therefore best to begin with long
syllables, though at times it may be correct to begin
with short, as in the phrase novum crimen a gentler
effect is created, if we commence with two shorts,
as in the phrase animadverti iudices but this opening, which comes from the pro Cluentio, is perfectly
correct, since that speech begins with something
similar to partition, which requires speed. Similarly
the conclusion of a sentence is stronger when long
syllables preponderate, but it may also be formed
of short syllables, although the quantity of the final
syllable is regarded as indifferent. I am aware that
a concluding short syllable is usually regarded as
equivalent to a long, because the time-length which
it lacks appears to be supplied from that which
follows. But when I consult my own ears I find
that it makes a great difference whether the final
syllable is really long or only treated as the equivalent of a long. For there is not the same fullness
of rhythm in diccre incipieniem timere as there is in
ausus est confiteri. But if it makes no difference
whether the final syllable be long or short, the concluding feet in these two instances must be identical
and yet somehow or other one gives the impression
of sitting down and the other of a simple halt.
This fact has led some critics to allow three timebeats for a final long syllable, adding the extra time-length which a short syllable derives from its
position at the end of a sentence to the long syllable
as well. And it not merely makes a difference with
what foot a sentence ends, but the penultimate
foot is also of importance. It is not, however,
necessary to go back further than three feet, and
only that if the feet contain less than three syllables,
for we must avoid the exactitude of verse on the
other hand, we must not go back less than two
otherwise we shall be dealing with a foot and not
with rhythm. But in this connexion the dichoreus
may be regarded as one foot, if indeed a foot consisting of two chorei can be considered as a single foot.
The same is true of the paean composed of the
choreus and a pyrrhic, a foot which is regarded as
specially suitable to the beginning of a sentence, or
of the other paean, formed of three shorts followed
by a long, to which the conclusion is specially
dedicated. It is of these two forms that writers on
rhythm generally speak. Some, however, call all
feet containing three short syllables and a long by
the name of paean, irrespective of the position of
the long syllable, and merely taking into account the
total number of time-lengths that it contains. The
dochmiac, again, which consists of a bacchius and an
iambus, or of an iambus and a cretic, forms a solid and
severe conclusion. The spondee, so frequently employed in this position by Demosthenes, is used with
varying effect. It is most impressive when preceded
by a cretic, as in the following instance De qua ego
nihil dicam, nisi depellendi criminis causa. Again there
is a point, of the importance of which I spoke above,
namely that it makes a considerable difference
whether two feet are contained in a single word or whether they are both detached. Thus criminis
causa makes a strong and archipiratae a weak ending, while tile weakness is still further increased if
the first foot be a tribrach, as for instance in words
like facilitates or temeritates. For the mere fact that
words are separated from each other involves an
imperceptible length of time for instance, the
spondee forming the middle foot of a pentameter must
consist of the last syllable of one word and the first
of another, otherwise the verse is no verse at all.
It is permissible, though less satisfactory, for the
spondee to be preceded by an anapaest e.g. muliere
non solum nobili, verum etiami nota. Andit may also, in
addition to the anapaest and cretic, be preceded by
the iambus, which is a syllable less in length than
both of them, thus making one short syllable precede three long. But it is also perfectly correct to
place a spondee before an iambus, as in armis fui, or
it may be preceded by a bacchius instead of a spondee,
e.g. in armis fui, thereby making the last foot a
dochmiac. From this it follows that the molossus also
is adapted for use in the conclusion provided that it
be preceded by a short syllable, though it does not
matter to what foot the latter belongs e.g. illud
scimus, ubicunque sunt, esse pro nobis. The effect of
the spondee is less weighty, if it be preceded by a
palimbacchius and pyrrhic, as in iudicii Iuniani. Still
worse is the rhythm when the spondee is preceded
by a paean, as in Brute, dubitavi, although this
phrase may, if we prefer, be regarded as consisting of a dactyl and a bacchius. As a rule, endings composed of two spondees, a termination which causes
comment even in a verse, are to be deprecated,
unless the phrase is composed of three separate
members, as in cur de perfiigis nostris copias comparat
is contra nos where we have a word of two syllables
preceded and followed by a monosyllable. Even the
dactyl ought not to precede a final spondee, since we
condemn verse-endings at the period's close. The
bacchius is employed at the conclusion, sometimes in
conjunction with itself as in venenum timerss while it
is also effective when a choreus and spondee are placed
before it as in ut venenum timeres. Its opposite, the
palimbacchius, is also employed as a conclusion unless, of course, we insist that the last syllable of a
sentence is always long, and is best preceded by a
molossus, as in civis Romanus sum, or by a bacchius, as
in quod hie potest, nos possemus. It would, however,
be truer to say that in such cases the conclusion consists of a choreus preceded by a spondee, for the rhythm
is concentrated in nos possemus and Romanus sum. The
dichoreus, which is the repetition of one and the same
foot, may also form the conclusion, and was much
beloved by the Asiatic school Cicero illustrates it by
Patris dictum sapiens temeritasfilii comprobavit. The
choreus may also be preceded by a pyrrhic, as in omnes
prope cives virtute, gloria, digitiate superabat. The
dactyl also may come at the close, unless indeed it be
held that, when it forms the final foot, it is transformed
into a cretic e.g. muliercula nixus in litore. The
effect will be good if it is preceded by a cretic or an
iambus, but unsatisfactory if it is preceded by a spondee, and worse still if by a choreus. The amphibrachys may close the cadence, as in Q. Ligarium in
Africa fuisse, although in that case some will prefer
to call it a bacchius. The trochee is one of the less
good endings, if any final syllable is to be regarded
as short, as it undoubtedly must be. Otherwise
how can we end with the dichoreus, so dear to many
orators Of course, if it be insisted that the final
syllable is long, the trochee becomes an anapaest. If
preceded by a long syllable, the trochee becomes a
paean, as is the case with phrases such as sipotero, or
dirit hoc Cicero, or obstat invidia. But this form of
paean is specially allotted to the beginnings of
sentences. The pyrrhic may close a sentence if
preceded by a choreus, thereby forming a paean.
But all these feet which end in short syllables will
lack the stability required for the cadence, and
should as a rule only be employed in cases where
speed is required and there is no marked pause at
the ends of the sentences. The cretic is excellent,
both at the beginning e.g. quod precatus a diis immortalibus sum and at the close e.g. in conspeclu
populi Romani vomere postridie. The last example
makes it clear what a good effect is produced when
it is preceded by an anapaest or by that form of paean
which is regarded as best suited to the end of a
sentence. But the cretic may be preceded by a
cretic, as in servare quam plurinos. It is better thus
than when it is preceded by a chores, as in quis non
turpe duceret assuming that we treat the final short
syllable as long. However, for the sake of argument,
let us substitute duceres for duceret. Here, however, we get the rest of which I spoke for we make a
short pause between the last word and the last
but one, thus slightly lengthening the final syllable
of turpe; otherwise quis non turpe duceret will
give us a jerky rhythm resembling the end of
an iambic trimeter. So, too, if you pronounce ore
excipere liceret without a pause, you will reproduce
the rhythm of a licentious metre, whereas if triply
punctuated and thus provided with what are practically three separate beginnings, the phrase is full of
dignity. In specifying the feet above-mentioned, I
do not mean to lay it down as an absolute law that
no others can be used, but merely wish to indicate
the usual practice and the principles that are best
suited for present needs. I may add that two consecutive anapaests should be avoided, since they form
the conclusion of a pentameter or reproduce the rhythm
of the anapaestic metre, as in the passage, nam ubi
libido dominatur, innocentiae leve praesidinun est, where
elision makes the last two syllables sound as one.
The anapaest should preferably be preceded by a
spondee or a bacchius, as, for instance, if you alter the
order of words in the passage just quoted to leve
innocentiae praesidium est. Personally, although I
know that in this I am in disagreement with great
writers, I am not attracted by the paean consisting
of three shorts followed by a long for it is no more
than an anapaest with the addition of another short
syllable e.g. facilitas, agilitas. Why it should have
been so popular, I cannot see, unless it be that those
who gave it their approval were students of the
language of common life rather than of oratory.
It is preferably preceded by short syllables, such
as are provided by the pyrrhic or the choreus e.g. mea facilitas, nostra facilitas; on the other hand, if
it be preceded by a spondee, we have the conclusion
of an iambic trimeter, as indeed we have in the paean
considered alone. The opposite form of paean is
deservedly commended as an opening for the first
syllable gives it stability and the next three speed.
None the less I think that there are other feet
which are better suited for this purpose than even
this paean. My purpose in discussing this topic at length is
not to lead the orator to enfeeble his style by
pedantic measurement of feet and weighing of
syllables for oratory should possess a vigorous
flow, and such solicitude is worthy only of a
wretched pedant, absorbed in trivial detail since
the man who exhausts himself by such painful diligence will have no time for more important considerations; for he will disregard the weight of his
subject matter, despise true beauty of style and, as
Lucilius says, will construct a tesselated pavement of
phrases nicely dovetailed together in intricate patterns.
The inevitable result will be that his passions will
cool and his energy be wasted, just as our dandies
destroy their horses' capacity for speed by training
them to shorten their paces. Prose-structure, of
course, existed before rhythms were discovered in
it, just as poetry was originally the outcome of a
natural impulse and was created by the instinctive
feeling of the ear for quantity and the observation of
time and rhythm, while the discovery of feet came
later. Consequently assiduous practice in writing will
be sufficient to enable us to produce similar rhythmical
effects when speaking extempore. Further it is not so
important for us to consider the actual feet as the general rhythmical effect of the period, just as the
poet in writing a verse considers the metre as a
whole, and does not concentrate his attention on the
six or five individual feet that constitute the verse.
For poetry originated before the laws which govern
it, a fact which explains Ennius' statement that
Fauns and prophets sang. Therefore rhythmical
structure will hold the same place in prose that is
held by versification in poetry. The best judge as to rhythm is the ear, which
appreciates fullness of rhythm or feels the lack of it,
is offended by harshness, soothed by smooth and
excited by impetuous movement, and approves
stability, while it detects limping measures and
rejects those that are excessive and extravagant.
It is for this reason that those who have received a
thorough training understand the theory of artistic
structure, while even the untrained derive pleasure
from it. There are some points, it is true, which are
beyond the power of art to inculcate. For example
if the case, tense or mood with which we have
begun, produces a harsh rhythm, it must be changed.
But is it possible to lay down any definite rule as to
what the change of case, tense or mood should be
It is often possible to help out the rhythm when it
is in difficulties by introducing variety through the
agency of a figure. But what is this figure to be
A figure of speech or a figure of thought Can we
give any general ruling on the subject In such
cases opportunism is our only salvation, and we must
be guided by consideration of the special circumstances. Further with regard to the time-lengths,
which are of such importance where rhythm is concerned, what standard is there by which they can be regulated save that of the ear Why do some
sentences produce a full rhythmical effect, although
the words which they contain are few, whereas others
containing a greater number are abrupt and short in
rhythm Why again in periods do we get an
impression of incompleteness, despite the fact that
the sense is complete Consider the following
example neminem vestrum ignorare arbitror, iudices,
hunc per hosce dies sermonem vulgi atque hanc opinionem
populi Romani fiisse. Why is hosce preferable to hos,
although the latter presents no harshness I am
not sure that I can give the reason, but none the
less I feel that hosce is better. Why is it not enough
to say sermonem vulgifuisse, which would have satisfied
the bare demands of rhythm I cannot tell, and yet
my ear tells me that the rhythm would have lacked
fullness without the reduplication of the phrase. The
answer is that in such cases we must rely on feeling.
It is possible to have an inadequate understanding of
what it is precisely that makes for severity or charm,
but yet to produce the required effect better by
taking nature for our guide in place of art none
the less there will always be some principle of art
underlying the promptings of nature. It is, however, the special duty of the orator to
realise when to employ the different kinds of
rhythm. There are two points which call for
consideration if he is to do this with success. The
one is concerned with feet, the other with the
general rhythm of the period which is produced
by their combination. I will deal with the latter
first. We speak of commata, cola and periods.
A comma, in my opinion, may be defined as the
expression of a thought lacking rhythmical completeness; on the other hand, most writers regard it
merely as a portion of the colon. As an example I
may cite the following from Cicero Domus tibi
deerat at habebas pecunia superabat at egebas.
But a comma may also consist of a single word, as in
the following instance where diximnus is a comma
Diximus, testes dare volumus. A colon, on the other
hand, is the expression of a thought which is
rhythmically complete, but is meaningless if detached from the whole body of the sentence. For
example O callidos homines is complete in itself, but
is useless if removed from the rest of the sentence,
as the hand, foot or head if separated from the
body. He goes on, O rein excogitatam. At what
point do the members begin to form a body Only
when the conclusion is added quem, quaeso, nostrum
fefellit, id vos ita esse facturos a sentence which Cicero
regards as unusually concise. Thus as a rule commata
and cola are fragmentary and require a conclusion.
The period is given a number of different names by
Cicero, who calls it ambitus, circuitus, comprehensio,
continuatio and circumscriptio. It has two forms. The
one is simple, and consists of one thought expressed
in a number of words, duly rounded to a close. The
other consists of commata and cola, comprising a
number of different thoughts for example, aderat
ianitor carceris, carnriex praetoris and the rest. The
period must have at least two cola. The average
number would appear to be four, but it often contains
even more. According to Cicero, its length should
be restricted to the equivalent of four senarii or to
the compass of a single breath. It is further essential
that it should complete the thought which it expresses. It must be clear and intelligible and must not be too long to be carried in the memory. A
colon, if too long, makes the sentence drag, while on
the other hand, if it be too short it gives an impression
of instability. Wherever it is essential to speak with
force, energy and pugnacity, we shall make free use
of commata and cola, since this is most effective, and
our rhythmical structure must be so closely conformed to our matter, that violent themes should be
expressed in violent rhythms to enable the audience
to share the horror felt by the speaker. On the
other hand we shall employ cola by preference when
narrating facts, or relax the texture of our periods
by considerable pauses and looser connexions, always
excepting those passages in which narration is
designed for decorative effect and not merely for
the instruction of the audience, as for example the
passage in the Verrines where Cicero tells the story
of the Rape of Proserpine for in such cases a smooth
and flowing texture is required. The full periodic
style is well adapted to the exordium of important
cases, where the theme requires the orator to express
anxiety, admiration or pity the same is true of
commonplaces and all kinds of amplification. But it
should be severe when we are prosecuting and
expansive in panegyric. It is also most effective in
the peroration. But we must only employ this form
of rhythmical structure in its full development, when
the judge has not merely got a grasp of the matter,
but has been charmed by our style, surrendered
himself to the pleader and is ready to be led whither
we will, by the delight which he experiences.
History does not so much demand full, rounded
rhythms as a certain continuity of motion and connexion of style. For all its cola are closely linked together, while the fluidity of its style gives it great
variety of movement; we may compare its motion
to that of men, who link hands to steady their steps,
and lend each other mutual support. The demonstrative type of oratory requires freer and more
expansive rhythms, while forensic and deliberative
oratory will vary the arrangement of their words in
conformity with the variety of their themes.
I must now turn to discuss the first of the two
points which I mentioned above. No one will deny
that some portions of our speech require a gentle
flow of language, while others demand speed,
sublimity, pugnacity, ornateness or simplicity, as
the case may be, or that long syllables are best
adapted to express dignity, sublimity and ornateness.
That is to say, while the gentler form of utterance
requires length of vowel sounds, sublime and ornate
language demands sonority as well. On the other
hand, passages of an opposite character, such as those
in which we argue, distinguish, jest or use language
approximating to colloquial speech, are better served
by short syllables. Consequently in the exordium
we shall vary our structure to suit the thought.
For I cannot agree with Celsus, when he would
impose a single stereotyped form upon the exordium
and asserts that the best example of the structure
required for this purpose is to be found in Asinius
e. g., si, Caesar, ex omnibus mortalibus, qui sunt ac
fuerunt, posset huic causae disceptator legi, non quisquam
te potius optandus nobis fuit. I do not for a moment
deny that the structure of this passage is excellent,
but I refuse to admit that the form of rhythmical
structure which it exemplifies should be forced on all
exordia. For there are various ways in which the judge's mind may be prepared for what is to come
at times we appeal for pity, at others take up a
modest attitude, while we may assume an air of
energy or dignity, flatter our audience, attempt to
alter their opinions and exhort them to give us their
best attention, according as the situation may demand.
And as all these methods are different by nature, so
each requires a different rhythmical treatment. Did
Cicero employ similar rhythms in his exordia to the
pro Milone, the pro Cluentio and the pro Ligario
The statement of fact as a rule requires slower and
what I may be allowed to call more modest feet;
and the different kinds of feet should, as far as
possible, be intermixed. For while the style of this
portion of our speech is generally marked by restraint
of language, there are occasions when it is called
upon to soar to greater heights, although on the
other hand its aim will at all times be to instruct the
audience and impress the facts upon their minds, a
task which must not be carried out in a hurry. Indeed
my personal opinion is that the statement of fact
should be composed of long cola and short periods.
Arguments, inasmuch as they are characterised by
energy and speed, will employ the feet best adapted
to these qualities. They will not however acquire
rapidity at the expense of force by employing
trochees, but will rather make use of those feet which
consist of a mixture of long and short syllables,
though the long should not outnumber the short.
Lofty passages, which employ long and sonorous
vowels, are specially well served by the amplitude of
the dactyl and the paean, feet which, although they
contain a majority of short syllables, are yet not
deficient in time-length. On the other hand, where violence is required, the requisite energy will be
best secured by the employment of the iambus, not
merely because that foot contains but two syllables,
with the result that its beat is more frequent, making
it unsuited to gentle language, but also because every
foot gives the effect of an ascent, as they climb and
swell from short to long, a fact which renders them
superior to the choreus, which sinks from long to
short. Subdued passages, such as occur in the
peroration, also require slow syllables, which must,
however, be less sonorous. Celsus insists that there is a special form of rhythmical structure which produces a particularly stately
effect I do not know to what he refers and, if I did,
should not teach it, since it must inevitably be slow
and flat, that is to say unless this quality is derived
from the words and thoughts expressed. If it is to
be sought for its own sake, independent of such
considerations, I cannot sufficiently condemn it.
But, to bring this discussion to a close, I would
remark that our rhythm must be designed to suit
our delivery. Is not our tone subdued as a rule in
the exordium, except of course in cases of accusation
where we have to rouse the judge or fill him with
indignation, full and clear in the statement of fact,
in argument impetuous and rapid not merely in our
language, but in our motions as well, expansive and
fluent in commonplaces and descriptions and, as a rule,
submissive and downcast in the peroration But the
motions of the body also have their own appropriate
rhythms, while the musical theory of rhythm determines the value of metrical feet no less for dancing
than for tunes. Again, do we not adapt our voice
and gesture to the nature of the themes on which we are speaking There is, therefore, all the less
reason for wonder that the same is true of the feet
employed in prose, since it is natural that what is
sublime should have a stately stride, that what is
gentle should seem to be led along, that what
is violent should seem to run and what is tender to
flow. Consequently, where necessary, we must
borrow the pompous effect produced by the spondees
and iambi which compose the greater portion of the
rhythms of tragedy, as in the line, But the comic senarius, styled trochaic, contains a
number of pyrrhics and trochees, which others call
tribrachs, but loses in dignity what it gains in speed,
as for example in the line, Violent and abusive language, on the other hand,
even in verse, as I have said, employs the iambic for
its attack e.g., As a general rule, however, if the choice were forced
upon me, I should prefer my rhythm to be harsh and
violent rather than nerveless and effeminate, as it is
in so many writers, more especially in our own day,
when it trips along in wanton measures that suggest
the accompaniment of castanets. Nor will any
rhythm ever be so admirable that it ought to be continued with the same recurrence of feet. For we
shall really be indulging in a species of versification
if we seek to lay down one law for all varieties of
speech further, to do so would lay us open to the
charge of the most obvious affectation, a fault of
which we should avoid even the smallest suspicion,
while we should also weary and cloy our audience by
the resulting monotony; the sweeter the rhythm,
the sooner the orator who is detected in a studied
adherence to its employment, will cease to carry
conviction or to stir the passions and emotions. The
judge will refuse to believe him or to allow him to
excite his compassion or his anger, if he thinks that
he has leisure for this species of refinement. It will
therefore be desirable from time to time that in
certain passages the rhythm should be deliberately
dissolved this is a task of no small difficulty, if the
appearance of effort is to be avoided. In so doing
we must not come to the assistance of the rhythm
by introducing bhyperhata of extravagant length, for
fear that we should betray the purpose of our action
and we should certainly never in our search for
smoothness abandon for another any word that is
apt and appropriate to our theme. As a matter of
fact no word will be so intractable as to baffle all our
attempts to find it a suitable position; but it must
be remembered that when we avoid such words, we
do so not to enhance the charm of our rhythm, but
to evade a difficulty. I am not, however, surprised
that Latin writers have paid more attention to
rhythmical structure than the Athenians, since Latin
words possess less correctness and charm. Nor again
do I account it a fault in Cicero that, in this respect,
he diverged to some extent from the practice of Demosthenes. However, my final book will explain
the nature of the difference between our language
and that of Greece. But I must bring this book to a conclusion without
more delay, since it has already exceeded the limits
designed for it. To sum up then, artistic structure
must be decorous, pleasing and varied. It consists
of three parts, order, connexion and rhythm. The
method of its achievement lies in addition, subtraction
and alteration of words. Its practice will depend
upon the nature of our theme. The care which it
demands is great, but, still, less than that demanded
by expression and thought. Above all it is necessary
to conceal the care expended upon it so that our
rhythms may seem to possess a spontaneous flow, not
to have been the result of elaborate search or
compulsion. div1