 THE observations contained in the preceding five
books approximately cover the method of invention
and the arrangement of the material thus provided.
It is absolutely necessary to acquire a thorough
knowledge of this method in all its details, if we
desire to become accomplished orators, but a simpler
and briefer course of instruction is more suitable for
beginners. For they tend either to be deterred from
study by the difficulties of so detailed and complicated
a course, or lose heart at having to attempt tasks of
such difficulty just at the very period when their
minds need special nourishment and a more attractive form of diet, or think that when they have
learned this much and no more, they are fully
equipped for the tasks of eloquence, or finally, regarding themselves as fettered by certain fixed laws
of oratory, shrink from making any effort on their
own initiative. Consequently, it has been held that
those who have exercised the greatest care in
writing text-books of rhetoric have been the furthest
removed from genuine eloquence. Still, it is absolutely necessary to point out to beginners the road
which they should follow, though this road must be
smooth and easy not merely to enter, but to indicate.
Consequently, our skilful instructor should select all that is best in the various writers on the subject
and content himself for the moment with imparting
those precepts of which he approves, without wasting
time over the refutation of those which he does not
approve. For thus your pupils will follow where you
lead. Later, as they acquire strength in speaking,
their learning will grow in proportion. To begin
with, they may be allowed to think that there is no
other road than that on which we have set their
feet, and it may be left to time to teach them what
is actually the best. It is true that writers on
rhetoric have, by the pertinacity with which they
have defended their opinions, made the principles
of the science which they profess somewhat complicated; but these principles are in reality neither
obscure nor hard to understand. Consequently, if
we regard the treatment of the art as a whole, it is
harder to decide what we should teach than to teach
it, once the decision has been made. Above all, in
the two departments which I have mentioned, the
necessary rules are but few in number, and if the
pupil gives them ready acceptance, he will find that
the path to further accomplishment presents no
difficulty. I have, it is true, already expended much labour
on this portion of my task; for I desired to make
it clear that rhetoric is the science of speaking well,
that it is useful, and further, that it is an art and a
virtue. I wished also to show that its subject matter
consists of everything on which an orator may be
called to speak, and is, as a rule, to be found in three
classes of oratory, demonstrative, deliberative, and
forensic; that every speech is composed of matter
and words, and that as regards matter we must study invention, as regards words, style, and as
regards both, arrangement, all of which it is the
task of memory to retain and delivery to render
attractive. I attempted to show that the duty of
the orator is composed of instructing, moving and
delighting his hearers, statement of facts and argument falling under the head of instruction, while
emotional appeals are concerned with moving the
audience and, although they may be employed
throughout the case, are most effective at the beginning and end. As to the element of charm, I
pointed out that, though it may reside both in facts
and words, its special sphere is that of style. I
observed that there are two kinds of questions, the
one indefinite, the other definite, and involving the
consideration of persons and circumstances of time
and place; further, that whatever our subject matter, there are three questions which we must ask, is
it what is it and of what kind is it To this I
added that demonstrative oratory consists of praise
and denunciation, and that in this connexion we
must consider not merely the acts actually performed by the person of whom we were speaking,
but what happened after his death. This task I
showed to be concerned solely with what is honourable or expedient. I remarked that in deliberative
oratory there is a third department as well which
depends on conjecture, for we have to consider
whether the subject of deliberation is possible or
likely to happen. At this point I emphasised the
importance of considering who it is that is speaking,
before whom he is speaking, and what he says. As
regards forensic cases, I demonstrated that some
turn on one point of dispute, others on several, and that whereas in some cases it is the attack, in others
in is the defence that determines the basis; that
every defence rests on denial, which is of two kinds,
since we may either deny that the act was committed or that its nature was that alleged, while it
further consists of justification and technical pleas
to show that the action cannot stand. I proceeded
to show that questions must turn either on something written or something done in the latter
case we have to consider the truth of the facts
together with their special character and quality;
in the former we consider the meaning or the
intention of the words, with reference to which we
usually examine the nature of all cases, criminal or
civil, which fall under the heads of the letter and
intention, the syllogism, ambiguity or contrary lairs.
I went on to point out that in all forensic cases the
speech consists of five parts, the exordium designed
to conciliate the audience, the statement of facts
designed to instruct him, the proof which confirms
our own propositions, the refutation which overthrows
the arguments of our opponents, and the peroration
which either refreshes the memory of our hearers
or plays upon their emotions. I then dealt with the
sources of arguments and emotion, and indicated
the means by which the judges should be excited,
placated, or amused. Finally I demonstrated the
method of division. But I would ask that the
student who is really desirous of learning should
believe that there are also a variety of subjects with
regard to which nature itself should provide much
of the requisite knowledge without any assistance
from formal teaching, so that the precepts of which
I have spoken may be regarded not so much as having been discovered by the professors of rhetoric
as having been noted by them when they presented
themselves. The points which follow require greater care and
industry. For I have now to discuss the theory of
style, a subject which, as all orators agree, presents
the greatest difficulty. For Marcus Antonius, whom
I mentioned above, states that lie has seen many
good, but no really eloquent speakers, and holds
that, while to be a good speaker it is sufficient to
say what is necessary, only the really eloquent
speaker can do this in ornate and appropriate language. And if this excellence was to be found in
no orator up to his own day, and not even in himself
or Lucius Crassus, we may regard it as certain that
the reason why they and their predecessors lacked
this gift was its extreme difficulty of acquisition.
Again, Cicero holds that, while invention and
arrangement are within the reach of any man of
good sense, eloquence belongs to the orator alone,
and consequently it was on the rules for the cultivation of eloquence that he expended the greatest
care. That he was justified in so doing is shown
clearly by the actual name of the art of which I am
speaking. For the verb eloqui means the production
and communication to the audience of all that the
speaker has conceived in his mind, and without this
power all the preliminary accomplishments of oratory
are as useless as a sword that is kept permanently
concealed within its sheath. Therefore it is on this
that teachers of rhetoric concentrate their attention, since it cannot possibly be acquired without
the assistance of the rules of artit is this which
is the chief object of our study, the goal of all our exercises and all our efforts at imitation, and it
is to this that we devote the energies of a lifetime;
it is this that makes one orator surpass his rivals,
this that makes one style of speaking preferable to
another. The failure of the orators of the Asiatic
and other decadent schools did not lie in their
inability to grasp or arrange the facts on which
they had to speak, nor, on the other hand, were
those who professed what we call the dry style of
oratory either fools or incapable of understanding
the cases in which they were engaged. No, the
fault of the former was that they lacked taste and
restraint in speaking, while the latter lacked power,
whence it is clear that it is here that the real faults
and virtues of oratory are to be found. This does not, however, mean that we should
devote ourselves to the study of words alone. For
I am compelled to offer the most prompt and determined resistance to those who would at the very
portals of this enquiry lay hold of the admissions
I have just made and, disregarding the subject
matter which, after all, is the backbone of any
speech, devote themselves to the futile and crippling
study of words in a vain desire to acquire the gift of
elegance, a gift which I myself regard as the fairest
of all the glories of oratory, but only when it is
natural and unaffected. Healthy bodies, enjoying
a good circulation and strengthened by exercise,
acquire grace from the same source that gives them
strength, for they have a healthy complexion, firm
flesh and shapely thews. But, on the other hand,
the man who attempts to enhance these physical
graces by the effeminate use of depilatories and cosmetics, succeeds merely in defacing them by the very care which he bestows on them. Again, a
tasteful and magnificent dress, as the Greek poet
tells us, lends added dignity to its wearer but
effeminate and luxurious apparel fails to adorn the
body and merely reveals the foulness of the mind.
Similarly, a translucent and iridescent style merely
serves to emasculate the subject which it arrays with
such pomp of words. Therefore I would have the
orator, while careful in his choice of words, be even
more concerned about his subject matter. For, as a
rule, the best words are essentially suggested by the
subject matter and are discovered by their own
intrinsic light. But to-day we hunt for these words
as though they were always hiding themselves and
striving to elude our grasp. And thus we fail to
realise that they are to be found in the subject of
our speech, and seek them elsewhere, and, when we
have found them, force them to suit their context.
It is with a more virile spirit that we should pursue
eloquence, who, if only her whole body be sound,
will never think it her duty to polish her nails and
tire her hair. The usual result of over-attention to the niceties
of style is the deterioration of our eloquence. The
main reason for this is that those words are best
which are least far-fetched and give the impression
of simplicity and reality. For those words which are
obviously the result of careful search and even seem to
parade their self-conscious art, fail to attain the grace
at which they aim and lose all appearance of sincerity
because they darken the sense and choke the good
seed by their own luxuriant overgrowth. For in
our passion for words we paraphrase what might be
said in plain language, repeat what we have already said at sufficient length, pile up a number of words
where one would suffice, and regard allusion as
better than directness of speech. So, too, all
directness of speech is at a discount, and we think no
phrase eloquent that another could conceivably have
used. We borrow figures and metaphors from the
most decadent poets, and regard it as a real sign
of genius that it should require a genius to understand our meaning. And yet Cicero long since
laid down this rule in the clearest of language, that
the worst fault in speaking is to adopt a style inconsistent with the idiom of ordinary speech and
contrary to the common feeling of mankind. But
nowadays our rhetoricians regard Cicero as lacking
both polish and learning; we are far superior, for
we look upon everything that is dictated by nature
as beneath our notice, and seek not for the true
ornaments of speech, but for meretricious finery, as
though there were any real virtue in words save in
their power to represent facts. And if we have to
spend all our life in the laborious effort to discover
words which will at once be brilliant, appropriate
and lucid, and to arrange them with exact precision,
we lose all the fruit of our studies. And yet we see
the majority of modern speakers wasting their time
over the discovery of single words and over the
elaborate weighing and measurement of such words
when once discovered. Even if the special aim of
such a practice were always to secure the best words,
such an ill-starred form of industry would be much
to be deprecated, since it checks tile natural current
of our speech and extinguishes the warmth of
imagination by the delay and loss of self-confidence
which it occasions. For the orator who cannot endure to lose a single word is like a man plunged
in griping poverty. On the other hand, if he will
only first form a true conception of the principles of
eloquence, accumulate a copious supply of words by
wide and suitable reading, apply the art of arrangement to the words thus acquired, and finally, by
continual exercise, develop strength to use his
acquisitions so that every word is ready at hand
and lies under his very eyes, he will never lose a
single word. For the man who follows these instructions will find that facts and words appropriate
to their expression will present themselves spontaneously. But it must be remembered that a long
course of preliminary study is necessary and that
the requisite ability must not merely be acquired,
but carefully stored for use; for the anxiety devoted
to the search for words, to the exercise of the
critical faculty and the power of comparison is in its
place while we are learning, but not when we are
speaking. Otherwise, the orator who has not given
sufficient attention to preliminary study will be like
a man who, having no fortune, lives from hand to
mouth. If, on the other hand, the powers of speech
have been carefully cultivated beforehand, words
will yield us ready service, not merely turning up
when we search for them, but dwelling in our
thoughts and following them as the shadow follows
the body. There are, however, limits even to this
form of study; for when our words are good Latin,
full of meaning, elegant and aptly arranged, why
should we labour further And yet there are some
who are never weary of morbid self-criticism, who
throw themselves into an agony of mind almost
over separate syllables, and even when they have discovered the best words for their purpose look for
some word that is older, less familiar, and less
obvious, since they cannot bring themselves to
realise that when a speech is praised for its words,
it implies that its sense is inadequate. While, then,
style calls for the utmost attention, we must always
bear in mind that nothing should be done for the
sake of words only, since words were invented
merely to give expression to things and those
words are the most satisfactory which give the best
expression to the thoughts of our mind and produce
the effect which we desire upon the minds of the
judges. Such words will assuredly be productive
of a style that will both give pleasure and awaken
admiration; and the admiration will be of a kind
far other than that which we bestow on portents,
while the pleasure evoked by the charm will have
nothing morbid about it, but will be praiseworthy
and dignified. I. What the Greeks call we in Latin call
elocuio or style. Style is revealed both in individual
words and in groups of words. As regards the
former, we must see that they are Latin, clear, elegant
and well-adapted to produce the desired effect. As
regards the latter, they must be correct, aptly placed
and adorned with suitable figures. I have already,
in the portions of the first book dealing with the
subject of grammar, said all that is necessary on
the way to acquire idiomatic and correct speech.
But there my remarks were restricted to the prevention of positive faults, and it is well that I should
now point out that our words should have nothing
provincial or foreign about them. For you will find that there are a number of writers by no means
deficient in style whose language is precious rather
than idiomatic. As an illustration of my meaning
I would remind you of the story of the old woman
at Athens, who, when Theophrastus, a man of no
mean eloquence, used one solitary word in an
affected way, immediately said that he was a
foreigner, and on being asked how she detected it,
replied that his language was too Attic for Athens.
Again Asinius Pollio held that Livy, for all his
astounding eloquence, showed traces of the idiom
of Padua. Therefore, if possible, our voice and all
our words should be such as to reveal the native of
this city, so that our speech may seem to be of
genuine Roman origin, and not merely to have
been presented with Roman citizenship. 